{"type":"link","mylink":"http:\/\/www.iapsop.com\/ssoc\/1926__webster___socialist_network.pdf","mytitle":"Socialist Network","mylang":"de"}
THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
BY
NESTA H. WEBSTER
(MRS. ARTHUR WEBSTER)
A U TH O R OF
“ T H E F R E N C H R EV O LU TIO N ,” “ WORLD REVOLUTION
“ SECRET SOCIETIES AND SU BV ERSIV E MOVEMENTS
ETC.
i
LONDON
1926
FOREWORD
The object of this book is not to provide a history of Socialism,
but merely an account of the Socialist organisations of modern
times. Hence no mention is made of isolated Socialist theorists,
but only of people connected with, or giving rise to, concrete
societies or groups. Secret or occult societies do not enter into
the scope of the inquiry, which is not concerned with mysterious
inner circles, invisibles or high initiates working in the dark, but
only with open movements—societies with recognised headquarters,
offices, executive committees, published lists of members, official
organs, statements of aims, etc. Though such a presentation of
the revolutionary movement is necessarily incomplete, and may fail
to satisfy those who care to inquire into causes, it will appeal the
more to practical people w
T
ho are unwilling to consider anything
they cannot see before their eyes.
It has seemed to me that a sort of guide-book of this kind,
accompanied by a chart, might be useful, in view of the fact that the
ramifications of the Socialist movement have now become so vast
and complicated that it is almost impossible to follow them. The
very difficulties with which I have been faced in the course of my
work have encouraged me in this idea. Often I have been obliged
to search for days in order to discover some simple fact, owing to
the extraordinary vagueness with regard to dates and practical
details which characterise Socialist publications—histories, pam­
phlets, year books and manuals alike. Long pages are devoted to
the doctrines of some society, but when it was founded, where
and by whom, may not perhaps once be mentioned. Again, one is
confronted by conflicting evidence which has to be sifted in order
to arrive at the truth.
What wonder, then, that the so-called “ Capitalist Press ” falls
into the strangest blunders when dealing with the different phases
of this movement, and that anti-Socialist writers, whose particular
business it is to study the subject, from time to time commit in­
accuracies which detract from the value of their work ?
In this little book I lay no claim to infallibility ; indeed, I do
not believe it would be possible for a single human brain to master
all the details of this bewildering network and to avoid going
wrong on some point—an international committee of experts would
be needed to achieve such a result. All I can claim is that I have
spared no pains to find out the facts of the case by seeking my
data in the Socialists’ own literature, ranging from the pamphlets
of Babeuf to those of the Komintern. If, then, inaccuracies of any
importance occur, it will not be for want of long and arduous re­
search, and in this case I shall be glad to have them pointed out to
me with a view to correction in a further edition. My only concern
is to find out the truth and make it known.
Aylesbury
CONTENTS
Foreword
CHAPTER I
Origins of Modern Socialism
CHAPTER II
Marxian Socialism (Pre-War Period)
CHAPTER III
Anarchism and Syndicalism .
CHAPTER IV
The War and Pacifism .
CHAPTER V
The Russian R evolution
CHAPTER VI
World Bolshevism.
CHAPTER VII
Bolshevism in Great Britain
8 CONTENTS
CHAPTER VIII
PAO B
T h e C a p t u r e of T r a d e Unionism . . . . . 7 3
CHAPTER IX
T h e B o l s h e v i s a t i o n o f B r i t i s h T r a d e U n i o n i s m . . 8 4
CHAPTER X
S u b s i d i a r y C o m m u n i s t O r g a n i s a t i o n s . . . . 9 5
CHAPTER XI
P a c i f i s m ( P o s t - W a r ) .................................................................................................... • 1 0 3
CHAPTER X II
Youth Movements . . . . . . . 1 1 3
CHAPTER X III
S o c i a l i s m a n d C h r i s t i a n i t y .................................................................................................................1 2 6
CHAPTER XIV
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................................................................................1 3 4
D i a g r a m of t h e M o s c o w O r g a n i s a t i o n . . . . 1 3 8
A b b r e v i a t i o n s ................................................................................................................................................................. 1 4 0
I n d e x of P e r s o n s . . . . . . . . 1 4 5
G e n e r a l I n d e x ................................................................................................................................................................1 5 8
CHART OF SOCIALIST NETWORK . In Pocket at E nd
THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
CHAPTER I
ORIGINS OF MODERN SOCIALISM
Although the main doctrines of Socialism have manifested them­
selves at intervals throughout the whole history of civilisation, the
present Socialist movement cannot be said to date back further than
the eighteenth century. Until then attacks on the existing social
order had taken the form only of sporadic outbreaks, but with the
philosophers, the Encyclopaedists and the Freemasons of France,
the social revolution began, and since that period has never ceased
to agitate the world. In a word, the revolution of which the 1789
explosion in France was the first outward expression is the same
revolution we are living through to-day. This is proved con­
clusively by the chart here appended, where the unbroken continuity
of the movement is shown in the form of a genealogical descent
which admits of no dispute.
The Jacobins.—Beginning at the top right-hand corner, we find
the first organised association of men and women formed for the
purpose of overthrowing the existing social order—the Society
of Jacobins. Starting as the Club Breton in 1789, the Jacobin
Club soon formed a vast society with branches in every corner of
France and with related groups in foreign countries. Although
the doctrines of the Jacobins were not yet known under the name of
Socialism, they, nevertheless, embodied certain Socialist ideas. To
judge by the public speeches and writings of the leaders, these
more closely resembled the theory professed by the small body of
modern Socialists known as “ Distributionists ” than to that of
Collectivism, yet in reality, according to the testimony of a con­
temporary, Marx’s ideas on “ class warfare ” and “ wage slavery ”
were already current among them.
“ The plan of the Jacobins was to stir up the rich against the poor
and the poor against the rich. To the latter they said : ‘ You have
made a few sacrifices in favour of the Revolution, b u t fear, not
patriotism , was the m otive.’ To the former they said : *The rich
m an has no bowels of compassion ; under the pretext of feeding the
poor by providing them w ith work he exercises over them a superiority
9
10 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
contrary to the views of N ature and to Republican principles. Liberty
will always be precarious as long as one part of the nation lives on wages
from the other. In order to preserve its independence, it is necessary
th a t every one should be rich or th a t every one should be poor ’ ”
(Fantin Desodoards, Histoire philosophiquc de la Revolution Franraise,
IV. 344, published in 1807).
Babouvistes.—In 1795 however, after the fall of Robespierre,
the complete theory of Communism as advocated by the modern
Bolsheviks was formulated by Francois Noel Babeuf, who assumed
the name of “ Gracchus ” and placed himself at the head of a
conspiracy for the violent overthrow of the government and its
replacement by a Communist State. The system advocated by
Babeuf was in almost every detail identical with that of modern
Communism—State control of industry and destruction of private
enterprise, compulsory labour to be paid for not in money but in
kind (as indicated by Bukharin, one of the present Soviet leaders,
in his Programme of the World Revolution), the workers not to be
allowed to choose their profession, but told off in gangs to do what­
ever work the State required (cf. R ussian Code of Labour Laws),
the nationalisation of children and destruction of family life, etc.
The Bolsheviks of Russia thus rightly described themselves in their
first Manifesto as the “ direct successors” of Babeuf (T he N ew
C om m unist M anifesto of the Third Internationale, with preface by
William Paul, published by the Socialist Labour Press, Glasgow,
1919).
Utopian Socialism.—After the suppression of the Babouviste
rising and the execution of its leaders (in 1796), the doctrines of
Babeuf and of his colleague, Buonarotti, continued to hold sway
amongst the secret political societies of France during the first
half of the nineteenth century. This period may be described as
the “ Golden Age ” of Socialism ; Socialist doctrinaires, in many
cases sincere idealists, such as Louis Blanc and Buchez in France
and Robert Owen in England, followed each other in quick succession,
and put forward every conceivable scheme for the reconstruction
of society on a Collectivist basis. Several of these men proved
their belief in their own theories by putting them into practice
under the form of associations and settlements—all, however, un­
successful. Of these, Robert Owen’s “ New Harmony ” settlement,
Fourier’s “ phalansteries,” and Cabet’s community in Texas are
the best known. But the revolution of 1848 and the failure of the
Socialist provisional government in France put an end to all such
theorising, and by 1850 Socialism was generally regarded as dead
—an exploded doctrine that could never be revived.
CHAPTER II
Marxism.—With the collapse of French Socialism the social
revolution entered on a new phase. Although the Collectivist
theories of Babeuf had persisted amongst the Utopian Socialists—
as Marx described them—in France and England during the first
half of the nineteenth century, the class war waged by the Jacobins
and the Babouvistes had largely died down, and except amongst the
followers of Blanqui pacific methods had been preferred to violence.
Further, the militant atheism of the Jacobins had played no part
in the Socialist but only in the Anarchist movement. But these
characteristics were to be revived by the man who must be regarded
as the pioneer of the modern Socialist movement, the German-
Jew Karl Marx.
Whilst Utopian Socialism was still on its trial, in 1847 Karl
Marx and his colleague, Friedrich Engels, published the famous
“ Communist Manifesto ” which to this day forms the Credo of
Bolshevism. The contention of certain Marxists to-day that the
Bolsheviks in advocating violent revolution have misinterpreted
the doctrine of the Prophet is effectually disproved by the concluding
words of the Manifesto :
“ The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They
openly declare th a t their ends can only be attained by the forcible
overthrow [my italics] of existing social conditions. L et the ruling
classes trem ble a t a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have
nothing to lose b u t their chains. They have a world to ■win.”
It was not until Marx obtained control of a concrete organisation
that his theories were able to make considerable headway.
The 1st Internationale.—In 1862 a number of French working­
men, pacific interpreters of Proudhon’s syndicalist theories, had
formed the “ Working-men’s Association ” with a view to improving
the conditions of labour. This was the organisation which Marx
succeeded in capturing. At an inaugural meeting in St. Martin’s
Hall, London, on September 28, 1864, the French working-men’s
society became transformed into the International Working-men’s
Association—now known as the 1st Internationale. Before long
the French leaders, Tolain and Fribourg; the English members,
Cremer, Odger, Weston, Professor Beesley, and also the Mazziniste
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD)
11
12 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Wolff, were gradually superseded by the German and Jewish clique
—Karl Marx, Hermann Jung, Eccarius, Lessner, Moses Hertz, etc.
The history of the 1st Internationale, like the history of the Jacobin
Club, consisted mainly in a struggle between contending factions,
from which the Marxists emerged triumphant. First came the
struggle against the Mazzinistes, who were speedily eliminated.
The Proudhonians held their ground until 1868, when at the
Brussels Congress the Marxist theory gained the ascendant, and
in 1869, at the fourth Congress, in Basle, so far prevailed that
Fribourg declared “ the Internationale of the French founders was
dead, quite dead.”
The Social Democratic Alliance.—Meanwhile the Anarchists
had entered the lists. In 1864 the Russian Michel Bakunin had
founded his “ Alliance Sociale Democratique ” on a secret society
basis, for the purpose of violently overthrowing the existing social
order, not in favour of Communism, but of complete Anarchy.
The difference between the two creeds is shown in the definition
of Marx’s system given by the Socialist Malon, member of the
1st Internationale, and by Bakunin’s resume of his own programme :
Marx : “ The State Socialism of Marx was comprised in the
conquest of political power, th at is to say, of the State, by the working-
class which has for its historic mission to p u t an end to the class war
by the abolition of classes, and to the present economic miseries and
contradictions by ‘ the nationalisation of production and distribution
of w ealth.’ ”
B ak u n in : “ Abolition of the State in all its religious, juristio,
political, and social realisations ; reorganisation by the free initiative
of free individuals in free groups.”
It was this formula that became later that of Anarchism.
“ I abominate Communism,” declared Bakunin, “ because it is
a denial of freedom, and I cannot understand anything human
without freedom.” In their advocacy of the class war and of
militant atheism the Bakuninistes were, however, at one with the
Marxists, and in 1869 the “ Alliance Sociale Democratique ” was
admitted to the 1st Internationale. Then the struggle between
the Communists and Anarchists began, and in 1872 the latter
were excluded, leaving the Marxists in possession of the field.
The headquarters were then removed to New York, and four years
later, in 1876, the 1st Internationale came to an end in Philadelphia.
The 2nd Internationale.—For thirteen years no Socialist Inter­
nationale existed. Then the idea was revived at Congresses in
Paris and Brussels in 1889, the 2nd Internationale was founded
“ and constituted as a central International Socialist Bureau in
1900.”
At the outbreak of the Great War :
“ it included twenty-seven countries, w ith a membership of twelve
millions. These were composed of the great Socialist or Labour
Parties, which each pursued their particular activities in the various
countries along their own lines, and w ith virtual independence. A t
periodical intervals, usually of three years, the parties m et in an
International Socialist Congress to pass resolutions on Socialist policy
and general questions. . . . In the intervening periods the International
Socialist Bureau, consisting of three delegates from each national
section, was entrusted w ith the work of carrying out the decisions of
the Congresses and arranging for future Congresses. The International
Socialist Bureau usually m et once a year, and the continuous business
was carried on by an executive composed of members of the Belgian
section working w ith a secretariat at Brussels. This Executive con­
sisted of Vandervelde (Chairman), Camille H uysm ans (Secretary),
and two other members of the Belgian section. The expenses of the
Bureau were defrayed by contributions from the N ational Labour and
Socialist organisations of the countries affiliated” (R. Palme D utt,
The Two Internationals, p. 1. 1920).
Adolphe Smith, of the Social Democratic Federation, who acted
as Official Interpreter at the Congresses of the Internationale from
the outset, expressed the opinion that by 1893 it had become
completely Germanised. The representatives of the British Trade
Unions, distinguished at home for their “ great tenacity combined
with moderation and common sense,” abroad “ displayed com­
plete ignorance of racial differences, foreign history, customs
and languages,” and were therefore unable to hold their own in
discussions with the Continental delegates. This “ gave the
Germans their chance,” and “ German ascendancy was demon­
strated at the Zurich Congress of 1893, because it was then definitely
decided that the British Trade Unions would no longer attend in
their official capacity. From that time the British Trade Unions
ceased to appoint delegates to the Congresses of the Internationale,”
although they helped the Congress of the Internationale to meet
in London in 1896 (Adolphe Smith, The Pan-German Inter­
nationale, p. 7).
From the time of the 1st Internationale onwards we see, then,
the Marxists gaining ground everywhere and Utopian Socialism
retreating further into the background. We shall now follow the
course of this movement in different countries.
Socialism in America
Beginning at the left-hand of the chart, we find Socialism in
America to have been German in character from the outset. To
quote the resumd given in the admirable Report of the Joint Legis­
lative Committee in the Senate of the State of New York on Re­
volutionary Radicalism, under Senator Lusk (filed April 24, 1920),
known usually as “ The Lusk Report ” :
“ The present Socialist m ovem ent in the U nited States m ust be
distinguished from the early experim ents in U topian ideals, represented
by the sectarian communities such as the Shakers, or the experim ent
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 13
14 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
in Communism m ade by the Owenites, or the Fourierists and the
Icarian communities.
" The m odern movement of organised Socialism m aybe dated from
the form ation of the Social P arty of New York and vicinity which
was organised in January, 1868, in the Germania Assembly rooms on
the Bowery. The membership of this organisation, recruited solely
from the German labour circles, and its policies and platform , were
in accord w ith the principles then set down by the International
W orking-men’s Association.
“ In 1868 this party nominated an Independent ticket, but the
num ber of votes which it secured was negligible. The organisation
did not survive this defeat, b u t in the same year some of the leading
spirits of this organisation organised w hat has been term ed by Morris
H illquit ‘ The first strictly Marxian organisation of strength and
influence on American soil,’ which was known as the Allgemeiner
D eutscher A rbeiter Verein.
“ In 1869 this organisation was adm itted to the National Labour
Union No. 5 of New York, and in the following year joined the In ter­
national W orking-men’s Association as Section I, New York. I t should
be noted th a t the pioneer elem ent of the Radical and revolutionary
m ovem ent in this country was German. . . .
“ The m ovem ent was generally stim ulated by the action taken in
transferring the General Council of the International from London
to New York. The general secretary of the council a t this tim e was
S. A. Sorge, who was an intim ate friend of both K arl Marx and Friedrich
Engels. H e became the m ost active of the organisers in the new
m ovem ent.” (L usk Report, I. 505, 506.)
Social Democratic Working-men’s Party—Socialist Labour
Party of North America.—In 1 8 7 1 the Social Democratic Working­
men’s Party of North America was formed by dissident members
of the International, and after the dissolution of the latter carried
on the work of Socialism. At a convention held in Philadelphia
in 1 8 7 6 the North American Federation of the International Working­
men’s Association, the Social Democratic Working-men’s Party of
North America, the Labour Party of Illinois, and the Socio-Political
Labour Unions of Cincinnati, were all consolidated into a new
organisation known as the Working-men’s Party of the United
States, founded upon Marxian principles, which in the following
year took the name of the Socialist Labour Party of North America.
This was led by the Jewish Marxian, Daniel de Leon.
“ For about tw enty years the Socialist Labour P arty was the
dom inant factor in the Socialist m ovement in this country. I t was re­
cruited largely from alien elements, and particularly under the influence
of German leaders. I t was wholly out of touch w ith American life and
American principles. The despotic character and extremely narrow
viewpoint of the party leadership finally resulted in alienating newly
converted Socialists from the party, and a new party, known as the
Social Dem ocratic P arty of America, came into being in 1899.
“ An attem p t to harmonise the difference was m ade in the following
year and a convention was held in Indianapolis on July 29, 1901,
representing the various Socialist organisations w ith the exception of
the New York faction of the Socialist Labour Party. The result of
this convention was the form ation of the Socialist P arty of America,
which has led the Socialist m ovem ent in this country since th a t tim e.”
(Lusk Report, I. 509, published in 1920.)
Intercollegiate Socialist Society.—In 1905 the Intercollegiate
Socialist Society was organised in New York, ostensibly “ for the
purpose of promoting an intelligent interest in Socialism among
college men and women,” but in reality openly propagating Socialism
(L u sk Report, I. 1119). Amongst the founders were A. J. Muste
and a Russian Jew, Misca Hilkowicz, who had assumed the name of
Morris Hillquit and later played a leading part in the Left Wing
Socialist movement (Congressional Record, December 19, 1925,
pp. 4 and 5). The Intercollegiate Socialist Society has now
become the League for Industrial Democracy, under which name
it carries on propaganda amongst the youth of America.
Rand School of Social Science.—In 1906 the American Socialist
Society, a membership corporation with a board of directors
elected annually, founded the Rand School of Social Science, which
became a powerful centre of Socialist propaganda. In the years
1918-19 its registered students numbered over 5,000. But by
this date the course of the revolutionary movement in America
had largely veered towards Syndicalism, with which we shall deal
in the following chapter.
Socialism in Great Britain
Before 1881 no Socialist organisation of any kind existed In
this country. The spirit of class warfare that the Jacobins of
France had communicated to their allies in the British revolutionary
societies had been extinguished in the wave of reaction that followed
on the first French Revolution, theoretical Communism had ended
with Robert Owen’s fiasco in 1827, whilst the Chartist riots had
roused the nation to the danger of popular violence. Only the
little band of “ Christian Socialists,” led by Charles Kingsley and
Frederick Maurice, continued to preach the necessity for a complete
reconstruction of the social system, but without the spirit of class
hatred, and also without any organisation at their disposal wherewith
to bring pressure to bear on public opinion. Meanwhile, in the
world of labour the growing strength of the Trade Union and the
Co-operative movements, and in the political arena the humani­
tarian schemes of Lord Shaftesbury—always the opponent of
Socialism—did much to counteract the work of agitators. During
the thirty years that elapsed after Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
came to five in England (in 1849), their theories made little or no
headway, and here, as on the Continent, it was not until another
concrete organisation was formed that Marxism was able to gain
a footing in this country.
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 15
16 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The Democratic Federation.—In the autumn of 1880 “a few
English members of the foreign Rose Street Club in Soho ”—a
district that has always been the haunt of alien agitators from
Marat to the present-day Anarchists—“ set to work on the difficult
task of awakening the wage earners of this country to the truths of
scientific Socialism and Social Democracy.” We quote the words
of H. W. Hyndman, leader of this group and the former ally of
Mazzini, who in 1866 had formed his “ Universal Republican
Alliance ” operating on the Continent, but with its Supreme Council
in London. Hyndman had now passed under the influence of
Marx, and so the Democratic Federation “ propagating the Marxian
doctrine of class war ” (M. Beer, A H istory of British Socialism ,
II. 197. 1920) came to be founded.
The first conference was held at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon
Street, on June 8, 1881. A few Radicals were present on this
occasion, but most of these were scared away by the declaration
of purely Socialist theories, and Hyndman with his Social Democratic
followers were left in possession of the field.
Amongst the earliest members of the Democratic Federation
were Herbert Burrows, the Radical and Freethinker Dr. G. B.
Clark, the Irish historian Justin M’Carthy, the Positivist Professor
Beesly of the 1st Internationale, Butler Johnstone for fifteen
years Tory member for Canterbury, several journalists, including
Morrison Davidson and Joseph Cowen, M.P., of the Newcastle
Chronicle, a number of old Chartists—James and Charles Murray,
Morgan, W. Townsend and S. Oliver—also John Williams, James
(not Ramsay) Macdonald, Garcia, Helen Taylor, the stepdaughter
of John Stuart Mill, and William Morris, the poet. In 1882
a band of “ Christian Socialists ”—J. L. Joynes, an Eton master,
Frost, H. H. Champion, Royal Artillery, also Champion’s disciple,
George Lansbury, joined the movement.
The S.D.F.—The Democratic Federation soon developed, as
Hyndman had hoped, “ into a thorough going revolutionary organisa­
tion,” and on August 4, 1884, by way of emphasising its Socialist
character, changed its name to the Social Democratic Federation.
Many years afterwards—from 1908 to 1911—it was known as the
Social Democratic Party.
Amongst the early members of the first S.D.F. were John
Burns, Tom Mann, Annie Besant, Will Thorne, Guy Aldred, Harry
Quelch and Ben Tillett.
The Socialist League.—But at the outset a split had taken place
in the Federation. No sooner had the S.D.F. been formed than—
to quote the words of Adolphe Smith, who became a leading member
—Marx and his friends “ made their descent upon the new move­
ment. Marx died in 1883, but he or Engels deputed his daughter,
Eleanor Marx, and her ‘husband,’ Dr. Aveling, to join.” Then they
brought in the Austrian Anarchist, Andreas Scheu, and Belfort Bax,
and together they persuaded William Morris “ to split away from
17
the Social Democratic Federation and found the Socialist League,
because Hyndman and the others would not follow the orders of
Engels. . . . Eleanor Marx was the first to leave.” She was
followed by William Morris, Belfort Bax and Andreas Scheu. This
was at the end of 1884. Hyndman now became the target of the
German group. Already, in their letters to Sorge, Marx and Engels
had described him as “ the curse of Socialism in Great Britain ”—
an opinion which Hyndman observes was reaffirmed later by Keir
Hardie, Ramsay Macdonald and Philip Snowden—and at the
discussion which preceded the split off from the S.D.F., Hyndman
relates that he was obliged to sit and listen “ to the most virulent
abuse ” of himself “ for three solid hours.”
The Manifesto of the Socialist League, issued by William Morris
and Belfort Bax, gives the following as its object:
“ Socialism means th a t the land, the capital, the m achinery,
factories, mines, workshops, stores, means of transit, banking, all
means of production and distribution of wealth m ust be declared and
treated as the common property of all ” (Dan Griffiths, What is
Socialism f p. 99 : G rant Richards, Ltd.).
The Socialist League only succeeded in enlisting a few hundred
members, in spite of its energy in the circulation of Socialist litera­
ture. Its organ, The C om m unist, was edited by William Morris,
who in 1890 wrote his famous description of a Socialist England
under the name of News from Nowhere. But by this time Anarchist
elements in the League had gained the upper hand, and in 1889 had
deposed Morris as editor of The C om m unist, which they handed
over to an Anarchist workman, Frank Kitz. Morris then recog­
nised the advisability of returning to his allegiance to Hyndman,
and after the collapse of the Socialist League in 1892 practically
rejoined the S.D.F., to which the rest of the dissenters, Belfort
Bax, Aveling, Eleanor Marx and Scheu, also returned. The pro­
gramme of the present S.D.F. is comprised in the following formula :
“ The establishm ent of the Socialist Commonwealth on a dem ocratic
basis ; the common ownership of the means of production and dis­
tribution ; the production of wealth for the use and enjoym ent of all,
instead of the production of commodities for the profit of the few.”
The organ of the S.D.F. was Justice.
The Fabian Society.—In January 1884, just before the Demo­
cratic Federation changed its name to the Social Democratic
Federation, the Fabian Society, named after Fabius Cunctator,
the Roman General, came into existence, under the leadership
of Professor Thomas Davidson, “ an ethical Anarchist Communist,”
who aimed at “ reconstructing human life on the principle of the
highest morality ” (Beer, II. 274). Davidson was quickly super­
seded by two young men who, a few months later, entered the move­
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD)
18 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
ment—a journalist, George Bernard Shaw, and a clerk, Sidney
Webb, son of a London hairdresser. Other early members of the
Fabian Society were Graham Wallas, Hubert Bland and William
Clarke, also Sydney Olivier and Annie Besant (now President of
the Theosophical Society), who came over to it from the S.D.F.
Later H. G. Wells became one of its leading members.
It is difficult for the lay mind to understand the antagonism
that has always existed between the F.S. and the S.D.F. Both
are fundamentally Marxian in their advocacy of the socialisation
of land and industry, but the Fabians have always been essentially
the “ drawing-room Socialists ” of England, disdaining street-
corner oratory, recognising the right of non-manual labour to a
place in the scheme of things, and professing disapproval of violent
revolutionary methods for bringing about the Socialist paradise.
Hyndman speaks of “ the bureaucratic Fabian Society which has
so assiduously promulgated the doctrines of middle-class permeation
and high-toned intrigue” (Reminiscences, p. 310); yet it is
probable that Fabianism, precisely by its method of middle-class
permeation, notably in the Civil Service, has done more to accelerate
the revolutionary movement than the cruder agitation of the S.D.F.
The programme of the Fabian Society is now as follows :
“ The Fabian Society consists of Socialists. I t therefore aims at
the reorganisation of Society by the em ancipation of Land and
Industrial Capital from individual ownership, and the vesting of them
in the com m unity for the general benefit. In this way only can the
natural and acquired advantages of the country be equitably shared
by the whole people.
“ The Society accordingly works for the extinction of private pro­
perty in land, w ith equitable consideration of established expectations,
and due provision as to the tenure of the home and the homestead ;
for the transfer to the com m unity by constitutional m ethods, of all
such industries as can be conducted socially ; and for the establishm ent,
as the governing consideration in the regulation of production, distribu­
tion and service, of the common good instead of private profit.”
(What is Socialism ? p. 98.)
The offices of the Fabian Society are at 25 Tothill Street,
London, S.W .l, and its official organ is the Fabian News (monthly).
Fabian Research Department.—A later development of the
Fabian Society was the Fabian Research Department, founded in
the autumn of 1912 by Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Webb, Major H. J.
Gillespie, Emil Davies (a German), Mrs. Pember Reeves and G. D.
H. Cole, then a Don of Magdalen College, Oxford. Another Fabian,
Julius West, author of a book on Chartism, was first made secretary,
and was succeeded a few months later by William Mellor, for many
years Associate Editor of the D aily Herald, which was started as
The Herald in the same year.
In the autumn of 1914 G. Bernard Shaw became the Chairman,
and remained in this post till the end of the war. G. D. H. Cole
became Vice-Chairman, G. P. Blizard Honorary Secretary, Sidney
Webb continued as Chairman of the Insurance Inquiry and Mrs.
Webb as Chairman of the Inquiry into the Control of Industry.
After the outbreak of war a further Committee was formed, to deal
with the question of International relations, for which Leonard
S. Woolf drew up a memorandum (R. Page Arnot, H istory of the
Labour Research Department).
In 1918 the Fabian Research Department became the Labour
Research Department, of which an account will be given later.
The I.L.P.—Although both the Fabian Society and the S.D.F.
had adopted Marxian doctrines, neither appears to have been
sufficiently Germanised to satisfy the man whom Mrs. Marx was
wont to describe as her husband’s “ evil genius ”—Friedrich Engels.
Accordingly, some four years after the death of Marx, he set to work
on a new movement, under the control of the Marx-Engels clique,
consisting of himself, Eleanor Marx, known as “ Tussy,” Marx’s
youngest daughter, and her “ husband,” Dr. Aveling, to whom
in reality she was never legally married. On May 4, 1887, Engels
wrote to Sorge :
“ Aveling is m aking a famous agitation in the E ast E nd of London
. . . he and Tussy are hard a t work. I t is a m atter of founding an
English Labour P arty w ith an independent class programme. This,
if it goes well, will then force the Social Dem ocratic Federation and
the Socialist League into the background, which will be the best solution
of the undecided quarrel ” (Briefe . . . an Sorge, p. 263).
Marx’s daughter was then deputed to gain a footing in the
trade unions, and soon Engels was able to write complacently of
the Gas Workers and General Labourers being “ bossed by Tussy ”
(die von T u ssy gebossten Gas Workers and General Labourers).
In 1892 Engels wrote again : “ We are making great progress here
in England. Affairs advance splendidly. Next year there will be
seen marching behind Germany not only Austria and France, but
also England.” Engels was right in his forecast, and in January
of the following year, 1893, the Independent Labour Party was
founded under the leadership of Engels’ tool, Keir Hardie, whom he
contemptuously described as an “ over-sly Scot ” (einer uberschlauer
Schotte) and “ a poor devil of a Scotch miner,” running a weekly
paper, the Labour Leader, which Engels declared to have been
financed with Tory money (Briefe an Sorge, p. 414). The year of
1893 thus marked a double triumph for the Germans—the exclusion
of British trade union influence from the Continental Internationale
and the penetration of the trade unions in England by German
influence through the foundation of the I.L.P., under the guidance
of the Marx-Engels clique in London. The plan of the I.L.P. had
already been mooted in 1888 in a Manifesto to the workers of Scot­
land by members of the Scottish Labour Party, led by Keir Hardie,
Cunningham Graham, Dr. Stirling Robertson and George Gerrie,
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 19
20 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
and the way further paved by the Labour Union of Bradford,
founded in 1890 by Ben Tillett, Robert Blatchford (editor of The,
Clarion, founded 1891) and Joseph Burgess.
The inaugural meeting of the I.L.P. at Bradford was attended
by about 120 delegates, five from the S.D.F., twelve from the F.S.,
including Bernard Shaw. “ No difference could be detected between
the programmes of the I.L.P. and the S.D.F., but marked
divergences existed between them in their attitude towards the
trade unions and in the tone of their propaganda ” (Beer, II. 304).
The Programme of the I.L.P. is now as follows :
“ The I.L .P. is a Socialist Organisation and has for its object the
establishm ent of the Socialist Commonwealth.
“ The Socialist Commonwealth is th a t S tate of Society in which
Land and Capital are communally owned, and the processes of pro­
duction, distribution and exchange are social functions.
“ The Independent Labour P arty believes in democracy organised,
both in its political and industrial aspects, for communal ends.
“ The basis of political democracy m ust be the whole body of
citizens, exercising authority through a national representative
assembly, directly elected by the people, w ith a decentralised and
extended system of local government.
“ The basis of industrial democracy m ust be : (1) the organisation
of the wage and salary earners, and (2) the organisation of consumers.
“ A central body, representative of the people both as producers
and consumers, m ust decide the am ount and character of communal
production and service necessary. The internal m anagem ent of each
industry m ust be in the hands of the workers, adm inistrative, technical
and m anual, engaged therein, operating in conjunction w ith the repre­
sentatives of the organised consumers. Experience will determine
the m ethods of co-operation and the detailed form of organisation, as
step by step is taken towards the attainm ent of the Socialist Common­
w ealth.” (What is Socialism f pp. 97, 98.)
The identity between the programme of the various Socialist
organisations at this date is shown by the “ Joint Manifesto of
British Socialist Bodies,” issued in this same year of 1893, in which
it is stated th a t:
“ Our aim, one and all, is to obtain for the whole com m unity com­
plete ownership and control of the m eans of transport, the means of
m anufacture, the mines and the land. Thus we look to p u t an end
for ever to the wage system, to sweep away all distinctions of class,
and eventually to establish national and international communism
on a sound basis.” (What is Socialism? p. 99.)
As long ago, then, as 1893 the aim of British Socialists of all
parties was admittedly Communism.
The particular importance of the I.L.P. consisted in the fact
that, just as Engels had planned, it succeeded in penetrating the
Labour movement, and this formed the first junction between the
Socialist doctrinaires and the manual workers. It was this coali­
tion that facilitated the formation of the parliamentary group
working for Socialism under the name of “ Labour.”
Amongst the early members of the I.L.P. were Tom Mann,
formerly of the S.D.F., Bruce Glasier, J. Ramsay Macdonald,
Philip Snowden, Robert Smillie, Fred Jowett, J. R. Clynes, George
N. Barnes, G. H. Roberts and Robert Blatchford.
The Labowr Leader, created by Keir Hardie as a successor to
his earlier paper, The M iner (founded in 1887), was edited by him
until 1904, when it became the official organ of the I.L.P. It
is now known as the N ew Leader, appearing weekly, whilst the
monthly organ of the Party is the Socialist Review. The offices
of the I.L.P. are now at 14 Great George Street, London, S.W .l.
The Labour Party
In 1892, the year preceding the foundation of the I.L.P., three
“ Labour ” members were elected for the first time to Parliament.
These were Keir Hardie for West Ham, John Burns for Battersea
and J. H. Wilson for Middlesbrough. Ben Tillett had stood for
Bradford, but failed against the Liberal candidate. On the fall of
the Liberal Government in 1895, the I.L.P. took up the electoral
campaign, under the leadership of Keir Hardie and Tom Mann, and
put up twenty-eight candidates, all unsuccessful. The Conser­
vatives then took office.
The Labour Representation Committee.—A further attem pt
was now made by the I.L.P. to capture the Trade Union movement
for Socialism, and though stoutly resisted by the older trade
union leaders, a resolution for co-operation between the Socialist
and Labour camps was passed by 546,000 votes to 434,000 at the
Trade Union Congress of 1895. The result of this decision was the
formation of the Labour Representation Committee at a Conference
of Labour and Socialist delegates on February 27 and 28, 1900.
The Committee consisted of seven Trade Unionists, two members
of the I.L.P., two members of the S.D.F., and one member of the
Fabian Society; J. Ramsay Macdonald was elected secretary.
At the election of 1900 fifteen candidates were put up by the
L.R.C., but only Keir Hardie and Richard Bell were successful.
In 1901 the S.D.F. withdrew from the L.R.C., but individual
members joined it as representatives of other organisations, trade
unions, etc.
The Labour Party.—In 1906 the L.R.C. became officially known
as the Labour Party.
The Party immediately became penetrated by Socialist in­
fluence. Although in its original programme it had stated that
it was necessary for the trade unions of this country “ to use their
political power to defend their existence ” and deprecated the
introduction of mere party politics into the movement, at the
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 21
22 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
eighth annual conference, held at Hull in 1908, an amendment
was proposed by William Atkinson, S.D.F. delegate of the paper
Stainers, declaring that the aim of the Labour Party w as:
“ To organise and m aintain a Parliam entary P arty, with its own
W hips, whose ultim ate object shall be the obtaining for the workers
the full results of their labour by the overthrow of the present com peti­
tive system of capitalism and the institution of a system of public
ownership and control of all the means of life.”
Although this purely Socialist amendment was defeated by
951,000 votes to 91,000, the same conference two days later passed
a resolution no less Socialistic :
“ T hat in the opinion of this Conference the tim e has arrived when
the Labour P arty should have as a definite object the socialisation of
the means of production, distribution and exchange, to be controlled
by a dem ocratic State in the interest of the entire com munity ; and
the complete em ancipation of Labour from the dom ination of capitalism
and landlordism, with the establishm ent of social and economic
equality between the sexes.”
By the adoption of this formula, to which it still adheres, the
Labour Party proclaimed itself to be not only Socialist but Marxian
Socialist. It aims, not only at the socialisation of the means of
production, as advocated by certain peaceful groups of French
Socialists and partially realised by the Co-operative movement in
this country, but at the socialisation of the means of distribution,
which entails the establishment of an autocratic bureaucracy.
In a word, it sets out to destroy all individual enterprise and
initiative.
Since 1908, therefore, the British Labour Party, controlled by
the I.L.P., has ceased to represent real labour, which is in the great
majority individualist, and has become simply the Party of Marxian
Socialism. The offices of the Labour Party are at 33 Eccleston
Square, S.W .l. Its official organ is the D aily Herald.
S.L.P.—The more revolutionary forms of Marxism were repre­
sented, however, at the time the Labour Party came into existence
by two bodies which had split off from the S.D.F. The first of these
was the Socialist Labour Party, founded in Glasgow in 1903 by
Scottish Secessionists, who had fallen under the influence of Daniel
de Leon and the Socialist Labour Party of America. The policy
of the S.L.P. is a blend of revolutionary Marxism and Syndicalism
and its principal leaders up till 1920 were Arthur MacManus,
William Paul and J. T. Murphy. The S.L.P. on its foundation
organised the Socialist Labour Press, and has published a great
number of pamphlets on Industrial Unionism and Marxism. The
headquarters of the S.L.P. are at 50 Renfrew Street, Glasgow. Its
official organ is The Socialist.
The S.P.G.B.—The year after the formation of the S.L.P., in
August 1904, a London group of secessionists from the S.D.F. led
by T. Fitzgerald, founded the Socialist Party of Great Britain on
strictly Marxian lines and advocating unrelenting class warfare.
A general meeting was held at the Communist Club, 107 Char­
lotte Street, Soho, on September 18, with J. Kent in the chair and C.
Lehane as General Secretary of the new party. The lecturers for
the society included F. C. W atts, I. Blaustein, H. Belsey, T. Jacobs,
A. Albury, etc. In its Declaration of Principles the object of the
S.P.G.B. is stated to be :
“ The establishm ent of a system of society based upon the common
ownership and dem ocratic control of the means and instrum ents for
producing and distributing wealth and in the interest of the whole
com munity ” (What is Socialism ? p. 99).
This formula seems indistinguishable from that of the Labour
Party, but the S.P.G.B. goes on to declare that it “ enters the field
of political action determined to wage war against all other political
parties, whether alleged labour or avowedly capitalist.” The
monthly organ of the Party, the Socialist Standard, has recently been
loud in its denunciations of the Labour Party, largely on account of
the latter’s toleration of religion, which it attributes to the policy of
vote-catching. In the issue for June 1925, it quotes with approval
Marx’s “ striking phrase ” : “ Religion is the opium of the people ” ;
and Lenin’s opinion given at the Congress of the Communist Inter­
nationale in 1922, that it is of paramount importance “ that a
magazine devoting itself to problems of militant materialism should
at the same time be conducting an untiring campaign of propaganda
for atheism.”
In a pamphlet entitled Socialism and Religion, published by the
S.P.G.B. in 1911, the following passages occur:
“ I t is therefore a profound tru th th a t Socialism is the natural
enemy of religion ” (p. 27).
“ A Christian Socialist is in fact an anti-Soeialist ” (p. 31).
“ The m ost absurd claim of all . . . is th a t Christ was a Socialist.
. . . Christ’s denunciation of wealth is not Socialism. *Sell th a t thou
hast and give to the poor ’ was His advice to a rich m an. This is not
Socialism, b u t anarchism and social suicide, for the wholesale distribu­
tion of alms is a *rem edy more deadly than the disease.’ . . . Socialism,
on the contrary, is the appreciation of the things of this world and the
endeavour to m ake a paradise here ” (pp. 36, 37).
“ Christianity . . . is the very antithesis of Socialism ” (p. 38).
On p. 42 Belfort Bax of the S.D.F. is quoted as saying: “ It may
be convenient for Socialists with a view to election expediency to
seek to confine the definition of Socialism to the economic issue,
abstracted from all the other issues of life and conduct” ; and the
pamphlet goes on to attack the Social Democratic Party for opposing
out of “ election expediency ” the sale of a pamphlet, Christ the
E nem y of the H um an Race.
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 23
24 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The S.P.G.B. thus shows itself consistently Marxian. It is not,
however, an important body, and its present leaders seem to be
obscure individuals, who append pseudonyms to their articles in
the Socialist Standard. The names of the members of the Executive
Committee do not appear in the publications of the Society, nor in
the Labour Year Book.
The headquarters of the S.P.G.B. are at 17 Mount Pleasant,
London, W.C.l.
Socialism in Ireland
In Ireland up till 1896 the revolutionary movement had retained
an almost exclusively national character. The “ United Irishmen,”
founded in 1791 under the inspiration of the French revolutionaries
and German Illuminati, the Fenians of 1858 with whom Karl
Marx and the 1st Internationale entered into relation, and that
most deadly of secret societies, the Irish Republican Brotherhood,
resembling the Carbonari and the eleventh-century Assassins with its
fearful oaths and obligations and its murder gangs, nevertheless
depended for their power less on Continental aid than on Irish
fanaticism. It was not until the Irish Socialist Republican Party
was founded in 1896, under the leadership of the veteran agitator
James Conolly, that Marxian Socialism gained a footing in the
country. Marx’s opinion of the man who was to represent his
teaching in Ireland is interesting. On May 9, 1865, he wrote to
Friedrich Engels :
“ As everywhere else, there exists naturally am ongst the English
working men a knot of asses, fools and rogues rallying around a
scoundrel. The scoundrel is in this case ‘ George P otter,’ a rat of a
man, supported by a corruptible and w itty m an, and as a stum p orator
a dangerous Irishm an nam ed Conolly . . . leader of the ‘ Beehive,’
the official organ of the Trade Unionists ” (Briefweehsel, III. 255).
From 1896 onwards the revolutionary movement in Ireland has
been dual in character, carried out under two flags—the green flag
of national and Catholic fanaticism and the red flag of International
Atheist Socialism.
Socialist Party of Ireland—Irish Transport and General Workers’
Union.—Theoretical Socialism has, however, never made a strong
appeal to the Irish temperament, and the Marxian “ Socialist
Party of Ireland,” founded in 1904, exercised far less influence than
the “ Irish Transport and General Workers’ Union,” inaugurated
in 1909 under the leadership of James Larkin, the agitator who has
played a prominent part in the troubles in Ireland and also in the
Anarchist disturbances in the United States. The Irish revolu­
tionary movement has, in fact, been largely directed from America,
but by the Anarchist-Communist rather than the Socialist elements
in that country; its further course must, therefore, be reserved
for a later chapter.
MARXIAN SOCIALISM (PRE-WAR PERIOD) 25
Socialism on the Continent
On the Continent, as in Great Britain, the Marxian influence
has steadily gained ground since the formation of the 1st
Internationale.
Germany.—In Germany the Social Democratic Party, led during
the lifetime of Marx by Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel, had
increased by 1903 to such proportions as to win 3,000,000 votes at
the polls. Before the war the Party was divided into three groups :
the Right Wing, led by Scheidemann; the Centre by Karl Kautsky,
who has since been indicted by Trotsky for his opposition to
Terrorism; and the Left Wing by Karl Liebknecht, the future
Spartacist.
France.—In France it was Jules Guesde who in 1877 succeeded
in capturing a large part of the Socialist movement for Marxism, in
spite of the opposition of the Broussistes. A group of Independent
Socialists, including Millerand, Clemenceau, Jaures and Viviani, was
formed later, but moderate Marxism continued to hold its own under
the leadership of Marx’s grandson, Jean Longuet, until the outbreak
of the Great War. The revolutionary elements in France were,
however, less inclined to Socialism than to Syndicalism, with which
we shall deal later.
Russia.—In Russia the revolutionary movement had been pre­
dominantly Anarchist until 1883, when the Marxists succeeded in
founding a party named the “ Group for the Emancipation of
Labour,” under the leadership of George V. Plekhanov, supported
by the German-Jews, R. Axelrod and Leo Deutsch, and the Russian,
Vera Zassulitch, who in 1878 had attempted to shoot Trepoff, the
prefect of police in St. Petersburg.
In 1898 this Group assumed the name of the Russian Democratic
Party, still led by Plekhanov, but in 1903, at a Conference held in
London, split into two parties over a point of policy; the majority,
under Lenin, being known as the Bolsheviks, from the Russian word
bolshee, signifying greater; and the minority, under Martofi, being
known as the Mensheviks, from menshee, signifying lesser.
Italy.—In Italy between 1880 and 1890 a Marxist group was
formed under the leadership of Turati, but here, as in France and
other Latin countries, the revolutionary movement was rather
Syndicalist than Socialist in character.
Such was the state of Socialism in the most important countries
of the world at the time of the outbreak of the Great War.
French Anarchists.—The origin of Anarchism and Syndicalism, as of
Socialism, must be sought in France. Proudhon, known as “ the
Father of Anarchy,” was the first to formulate the creed later to
be known as Syndicalism in the phrase :
*“ According to m y idea, railways, a mine, a m anufactory, a ship,
etc., are to the workers whom they occupy w hat the hive is to the
bees, th a t is, a t the same time their instrum ent, and their dwelling,
their country, their territory, their property.’ Hence Proudhon opposed
*the exploitation of the railways w hether by companies of Capitalists
or by the S ta te ’ ” (La Revolution au X VU Iem e siecle, p. 249).
Russian Anarchists.—The German and Russian Anarchists,
however, advocated no such definite scheme of industrial organisa­
tion, but concentrated solely on destruction.
Nihilists-Revolutionary Socialists.—In Russia between 1862
and 1881 the Nihilists and Revolutionary Socialists committed a
series of outrages which spread to other countries and culminated
in the “ tragic period ” inaugurated on May 1, 1891, and lasting
in Paris for three years, during which Ravachol and his gang ter­
rorised the population with bombs and dynamite. Attempts on
the lives of kings and presidents continued throughout the next
twenty years.
Italian Anarchists.—In Italy, where the group was led by Cafiero
and Malatesta, in Spain and in Portugal, the propaganda of Anarchy
found a fertile breeding-ground.
American Anarchists.—In the United States the ideas of Proud­
hon had gained a considerable following. His principal followers
were Stephen P. Andrew, William Green and Lysander Spooner.
In 1881 another Anarchist, Benjamin R. Tucker, started a periodical
named Liberty, advocating modified Proudhonism (L u sk Report,
p. 843).
It was in July of the same year that the Anarchists held a small
International Revolutionary Congress in London, presided over by
the German Anarchist Johann Most and the German-Jewish
Nihilist Hartmann, who had devised the plot for blowing up the
Tzar’s train two years earlier. Prince Kropotkine was also present.
As a result of the criminal intentions revealed at this Conference,
CHAPTER III
ANARCHISM AND SYNDICALISM
20
ANARCHISM AND SYNDICALISM 27
Johann Most was condemned to eighteen months’ imprisonment,
after which he left England and joined Benjamin Tucker in America.
Here he continued the publication of his paper, Freihext, which—
owing to the recalcitrance of the printers—he had brought out with
some difficulty in England. From that moment the Anarchist
movement in the United States continued without a break until
after the war.
English Anarchists.—In England Anarchy had been able to
make little headway, either under the personal direction of Johann
Most or Prince Kropotkine.
Freedom Group.—Only a small and obscure body of Kropot­
kine Anarchists, calling themselves the “ Freedom Group,” con­
tinued to carry on propaganda, and just before the war were led
by S. Lindner and Rudolf Rocker, who was for a time editor of
the London Yiddish revolutionary paper, Der Arbeiter Freind.
Communist Propaganda Groups.—In 1906 Guy Aldred seceded
from the S.D.F. and entered into relations with the Freedom Group.
Although an anti-Parliamentarian, Aldred remained a Marxian and
did not altogether agree with pure Anarchism, so he founded the
“ Communist Propaganda Groups ” in London in 1907. In 1910
he started The Herald of Revolt, and in 1912 went to Glasgow, where
a number of Socialist and Anarchist groups had been established—
S.L.P., I.L.P., Kropotkine Anarchists and Communist Propaganda
Groups—the two latter much opposed to each other.
Glasgow Communist Group. Aldred now founded (in 1912) the
Glasgow Communist Group as an Anti-Parliamentary Communist
Organisation. This became most active and succeeded in defeating
the Anarchist Group, which finally collapsed. The remaining
members then joined up with Aldred’s Group, which, however, was
from this moment until 1920 usually described as the Anarchist
Group. In May 1917 it took up its present quarters at 13 Burnbank
Gardens.
To the uninitiated all these differences of doctrine and nomen­
clature must remain incomprehensible, and we shall not attem pt
to explain how Aldred succeeded in combining allegiance both to
Marx and Bakunin, who in their lifetimes had been bitter enemies,
or why he opposed the disciples of Kropotkine, who had followed in
the footsteps of Bakunin.
In Great Britain, as elsewhere, the spirit of Anarchy, like the
theories of Socialism, did not become formidable until it had pene­
trated into the trade unions.
C.G.T.—I t was when the destructive ideas of Anarchy became
allied with the corporative spirit of the industrial workers under the
name of Syndicalism that the revolutionary movement began to
make headway. This junction was effected by the French “ Con­
federation Generate du Travail,” founded in 1895, which became
divided into two cam ps: Reformist Syndicalists, working for
industrial reorganisation on constitutional lines; and Anarcho-
28 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Syndicalists, concentrating on the plan of the General Strike for the
forcible overthrow of “ Capitalism,” first proposed at the Congress
of the 1st Internationale in Brussels in 1868. The doctrinaires of
the latter party in France were Emile Pouget, author of Le Sabotage,
Lagardelle Griffuelhes, and especially Georges Sorel, author of
Riflexions sur la Violence (translated into English as Reflections on
Violence) who succeeded in interpreting Marx’s doctrines in a
Syndicalist sense.
T.U.C.—At the time that Anarcho-Syndicalism was definitely
formulated by the left wing of the C.G.T., Trade Unionism had not
become revolutionary. The British Trade Union Congress, founded
in 1868 and holding its first congress in the following year, had
abjured all class warfare and concerned itself with the organisation
of labour in a perfectly constitutional manner. As late as 1895 it
had formally disassociated itself from “ Socialist Adventurers.”
American Federation of Labour.—The American Federation of
Labour, founded in 1881, pursued the same moderate policy.
I.F.T.U.—In 1901 the first attem pt was made to organise Trade
Unionism internationally, and a Congress was held at Copenhagen.
The outcome of this was the formation in 1903 of an International
Secretariat, headed by Karl Legien, President of the German
Federation of Trade Unions. Ten years later this developed into
the International Federation of Trade Unions, with Karl Legien
as President (Labour Year Book for 1924, p. 359).
The I.W.W.—As a counterblast to the constitutional policy of
the Copenhagen Congress in 1901, an International Syndicalist
Congress was held in the following year, and from this moment
Syndicalism began to gain ground both in Europe and America.
William D. Haywood, of the Western Federation of Miners, “ the
embodiment of the Sorel philosophy . . . a bundle of primitive
instincts ” (Ramsay Macdonald, Syndicalism , p. 36), took the lead
in forming the “ Industrial Workers of the World ” in America in
1905 on Syndicalist lines, and came over to England, where he met
with a warm reception. “ I saw him at Copenhagen,” says Ramsay
Macdonald, “ amidst the leaders of the working-class movements
drawn up from the whole world, and there he was dumb and
unnoticed; I saw him addressing a crowd in England, and
there his crude appeals moved his listeners to wild applause ”
(Ibid., p. 37).
From 1905 until the advent of the Bolsheviks to power, the
I.W.W. constituted the most formidable revolutionary organisation
in the United States. The American Federation of Labour, which
had hitherto pursued a constitutional policy, split into two wings,
both led by Jews, the right led by the sane trade union leader,
Samuel Gompers, and the left by William Z. Foster of the I.W.W.,
who has since identified himself with every phase of revolutionary
activity. The I.W.W. now became a blend of Syndicalism and
revolutionary Marxism, drawing into it the Marxist leader, Daniel
ANARCHISM AND SYNDICALISM 29
de Leon, who in 1908 headed the Detroit branch of the new move­
ment. From this developed in 1915 the Workers’ International
Industrial Union, which joined up with Daniel de Leon’s “ Socialist
Labour Party,” making the alliance between the two movements
complete.
Meanwhile Syndicalism had been carried to England, where it
found exponents in the S.L.P. (Socialist Labour Party) of Glasgow,
which had seceded from the S.D.F. under the influence of the
Socialist Labour Party of America (Beer, II. 355).
Ruskin College.—In 1899 two Americans, Walter Vrooman and
Dr. Charles Beard, had gone to Oxford and founded a Labour
College, named Ruskin College, with the object of teaching “ men
who have been merely condemning our social institutions . . . how
instead to transform these institutions, so that in place of talking
against the world they will begin methodically and scientifically
to possess the world, to refashion it,” etc. (The Burning Question
of Education, issued by the Executive Committee of the Plebs
League). The College soon won support from the trade unions,
and also from prominent members of “ the oppressing class ”—
to use the expression of a Ruskin student—such as the Dukes of
Fife and Norfolk, Lords Avebury, Crewe, Rosebery, Ripon, Roth­
schild, etc. The University took an interest in the scheme and
“ many overworked tutors gave time every week which they could
ill spare to small classes of Ruskin College students.” But these
overtures were not appreciated by the students, who strongly
objected to any association with the University, which they looked
upon as the enemy of the working-class and progress ” (The
Burning Question of Education, p. 3).
Plebs League.—In order, therefore, to prevent the college being
dominated by University influence, the students and ex-students in
October 1908 formed an organisation called the “ Plebs League,”
with the object of bringing about a definite and more satisfactory
connection between Ruskin College and the Labour movement.
The Principal, Denis Hird, became editor of Plebs, the magazine
of the League. This displeased the Executive of the College, which
met and forbade Hird to have anything more to do with the Plebs
movement. Hird was finally dismissed and the students went on
strike. The Plebs Committee then “ decided that Ruskin College as
an aid to the workers was worthless ” and that the trade unionists
must be asked to found a college of their own.
Central Labour College.—The result was the inauguration of
the Central Labour College at Oxford in September 1908, under a
Provisional Committee that included Denis Hird, George Sims,
S.D.P. and I.L.P., Fred Burgess, I.L.P., and Noah Ablett, I.L.P.
and of the South Wales Miners’ Federation. The movement had
now become definitely Syndicalist.
Industrial Syndicalist League.—In the following year, 1909, the
Industrial Syndicalist League, with its organ, The Syndicalist, was
30 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
formed under the leadership of Tom Mann (who had been present
at the International Conference of 1902), and in 1913 the “ Miners’
Reform Movement,” with the Syndicalist slogan, “ The Mines for
the Miners,” was started by Noah Ablett and A. J. Cook, the present
leader of the Miners’ Federation. In the pamphlet issued by this
body, The Miners' Next Step, the Syndicalist programme was made
perfectly clear.
Guild Socialism.—Meanwhile the less extreme form of Syndi­
calism known as “ Guild Socialism ” had come into the field. The
leader of this movement was G. D. H. Cole of the Fabian Society
and the Fabian Research Department, who at the time the latter
was founded had veered from Fabianism to Revolutionary Trade
Unionism. It was “ as a reinforcement of Syndicalism that G. D. H.
Cole wrote his World of Labour (1913) and as Syndicalists, Cole
and Mellor (together with Mrs. Townshend, Mrs. G. R. S. Taylor,
H. D. Harben and others) were compelled to take rather a different
outlook from those who followed the strict letter of the Webbs.”
Beaten by the older Fabians Bernard Shaw, Sidney Webb, E. R.
Pease, etc.—in the Fabian Research Department, Cole and his
supporters started the blend of Socialism and Syndicalism they
called Guild Socialism, and which, whilst setting out to place all
power in the hands of the Guilds instead of in the State, according
to the system of State Socialism, does not, like Syndicalism, aim
at the abolition of the State, which is to act as an umpire and
“ trustee for the community.”
One should not, however, be misled by the name of “ Guilds ”
into supposing that Guild Socialism visualises a return to the peace­
ful working guilds of the Middle Ages, no less than Syndicalism
“ it is to Revolutionary Trade Unionism the Guild idea looks ”
(The Guild Idea, p. 14), and Marx’s doctrine of the class-war
enters largely into its programme.
National Guilds League.—Guild Socialism is now practically
non-existent. In April 1922 a National Guild Council had been
formed representing both the producing Guilds and the National
Guild League, the object being mainly propaganda. The National
Guilds League has since become incorporated in the Council. In
1922 the Trade Union Congress passed a resolution welcoming and
approving the activities of the Guild and the formation of the
National Guild Council. The Congress decided also to associate
itself actively with the work and propaganda of the Council (Labour
Year Book for 1924). The collapse in May 1922 of the National
Building Guild, instituted in 1920 under the auspices of the N.G.L.,
dealt a heavy blow to the Guild idea, and although the Labour
Year Book for 1924 records that several other guilds were still
working successfully at that date, its next issue of 1925, as also that
of 1926, omits all reference to the movement beyond the insertion
in its list of addresses of the National Guild League, 39 Cursitor
Street, E.C.4.
ANARCHISM AND SYNDICALISM 31
Such, then, was the state of revolutionary organisation on the
outbreak of war. Everywhere Marxian theory and Marxian methods
had triumphed, both over the Utopian Socialism of early nineteenth-
century France and over the sane Trade Unionism of England,
France and America. Already the storm of social revolution was
threatening when the Great War burst upon the world.
CHAPTER IV
The outbreak of the War in 1914 brought another issue to the fore
in the field of Socialist politics—Nationalism versus Internationalism.
Pacifism in the sense of Internationalism was, of course, no new thing,
but had existed ever since it had been denounced as a “ dangerous
dream ” by Mirabeau in the course of the French revolution.
In this country the first pacifist groups had been formed in 1816,
when (on June 14) the present “ Peace Society ” was founded under
the name of “ The Society for the Promotion of Permanent and
Universal Peace,” with Robert Marsden as Chairman.
But it was not until the end of the century that pacifist societies
began to multiply. The following are the principal organisations
formed in Great Britain before the outbreak of the Great War :
1880. The International Arbitration and Peace A ssociation;
Chairm an: Felix Moscheles. Vice-Chairman: C. E.
Maurice.
1883. Irish Peace Society.
1904. B ritish National Peace Congress. President: Lord
Courtney of Penwith (brother-in-law of Sidney Webb).
1905. N ational Peace Council. President: Hon. Lord Weardale.
Secretary : Carl Heath.
1910. Rationalist Peace Society. President: J. M. Robertson,
M.P.
1910. Church of England Peace League. President: Bishop of
Lincoln.
1911. School Peace League. President: Bishop of Hereford.
Chairman : C. E. Maurice.
1912. B and of Peace U nion; Comrades of Peace. Juvenile
branches of Peace Society.
1912. Catholic Peace Society.
1912. Cambridge University W ar and Peace Society.
1913. The Carton Foundation. (Allied with a number of minor
Pacifist groups such as the W ar and Peace Societies of
Oxford, Cambridge and London Universities, the N orm an
Angell League, etc.)
1914. The Jew ish Peace Society. President: The Chief Rabbi,
Dr. Hertz. Secretary : Miss E. Behrens.
THE WAR AND PACIFISM
32
THE WAR AND PACIFISM 33
Such was the network of pacifist organisation in this country
on which Germany not unreasonably counted to prevent England’s
resistance to her scheme of world domination. On the Continent
Socialist theory provided little or no obstacle to the outbreak of
war, and in 1914 on both sides the national spirit triumphed over
the doctrines of International Socialism. The French Socialist
Party under Albert Thomas and Renaudel, the German Socialist
Party under Scheidemann and Ebert, the Austrian Social Democratic
Party under Renner and Pernerstorfer, the Belgian Labour Party
under Vandervelde and de Brouckere, the Russian Right Wing
Social Democrats—that is to say, the Nationalist Menshevik group
led by Plechanov—and the Italian Socialist Union under Mussolini
supported their governments in entering the War.
B.S.P.—In England only the Labour Party stood by the Govern­
ment, the I.L.P., S.L.P., and S.P.G.B. all opposed the war and
preached Pacifism, whilst the S.D.P., which in 1911 had become the
B.S.P. (British Socialist P arty)—still led by Hyndman and com­
prising Hunter W atts, Dan Irving, Russell Smart, Victor Fisher
and Adolphe Smith—were divided on the question. At the 1916
Conference this difference of opinion led to a climax and the Party
split into two. The anti-war party, comprising Albert Inkpin,
E. C. Fairchild, Fineberg, Petroff and John Maclean, retaining the
name of the B.S.P., whilst the party supporting the war took the
name of the National Socialist Party.
New B.S.P.—The new B.S.P. was formed as follows :
General Secretary : Albert Inkpin.
Executive Committee :
F. W. Llewellyn
A. A. W atts
Charles Dukes
Albert Ward
Mrs.
Fred Shaw
G. Deer
J. F. Hodgson
John Maclean
Dora B. Montefiore
Headquarters : 21a Maiden Lane, W.C.2.
The opposing faction having carried off the organ of the Party,
Justice, the B.S.P. started a new paper, The Call.
The N.S.P.—The National Socialist Party, led by Hyndman,
had an Executive Committee of the following :
H. M. Hyndman
A. Burden
F. J. Gould
Adolphe Smith
(alias A. S. Headingley)
Councillor J. J. Jones
Councillor A. Whiting
G. C. Beresford
Councillor F. H. Gorle
Emily Hayes
R. Travers Hyndman
H. W. Lee
John Stokes
J. Hunter Watts
J. G. Webster
Hon. Treasurer : Will Thorne.
34 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
A few members of the I.L.P. now joined the N.S.P., but the
main body of the I.L.P. took up a rigidly Pacifist attitude.
I.L.P.—From the moment of the outbreak of hostilities it was
the I.L.P. which took the lead in Pacifist agitation. “ One of the
first acts ” of its National Administrative Council, which included
Ramsay Macdonald, W. C. Anderson, Egerton Wake (later National
Organiser of the Labour Party), Bruce Glasier, etc., “ was the organi­
sation of a campaign throughout the country against recruiting.
. . . These anti-recruiting meetings of the I.L.P. formed the
nucleus out of which all the Defeatist and Bolshevik movements
. . . developed ” (series of articles in M orning Post, entitled
“ Bolshevism in Great Britain,” first week of December 1918).
U.D.C.—In September 1914 the I.L.P. was instrumental in
forming the Union of Democratic Control with the following
personnel:
Executive Committee :
Norman Angell (I.L.P., on Directorate of Garton Foundation)
J. A. Hobson
J. Ramsay Macdonald, M.P. (I.L.P.)
E. D. Morel (I.L.P., National Peace Council)
Arthur Ponsonby (I.L.P.)
Mrs. H. M. Swanwick
Charles Trevelyan, M.P. (I.L.P.)
Hon. Secretary : E. D. Morel.
The General Council included W. C. Anderson, H. N. Brailsford,
F. Seymour Cocks, B. N. Langdon Davies, Dr. Marion Phillips,
M. Philips Price, Hon. Mrs. Franklin, Arthur Henderson, G. H.
Hardy, F. W. Jowett, Bertrand Russell and Israel Zangwill.
The ostensible object of the U.D.C. was :
“ To aim a t securing such term s th a t the war will not, either through
the hum iliation of the defeated nation, or an artificial arrangem ent
of frontiers, m erely become the starting-point for now national an­
tagonisms and future wars.”
The organ of the U.D.C., Foreign A ffairs, was edited by E. D.
Morel, really the prime mover of the organisation, who was accused
in Parliament by Will Thorne of the S.D.F. on April 6, 1916, of
being “ a paid agent of the German Government,” and in the
following year (on September 4, 1917) was sentenced to six months’
imprisonment for sending information out of the country.
No Conscription Fellowship.—A further outcome of the I.L.P. and
U.D.C. was the “ No Conscription Fellowship,” formed in October
1914 with the object of opposing every effort to introduce compulsory
military service. By 1916 it had succeeded in banding together
in one organisation the vast majority of conscientious objectors,
and in collecting a membership of 15,000 to 20,000 people, in­
cluding a number of Quakers.
The Hon. Secretary was A. Fenner Brockway, the Chairman
Clifford Allen, whilst among the supporters of the movement were
C. H. Norman, J. H. Hudson, M.A., Lord Courtney of Penwith,
Philip Snowden, Arnold Rowntree, etc.
Fellowship of Reconciliation.—Two months later, in December
1914, came the “ Fellowship of Reconciliation,” founded at Cam­
bridge by a group of about 130 people professing as Christians to
be “ forbidden to wage war ” and to be working for “ the enthrone­
ment of love in personal, social, commercial and national life.”
The leaders included the Rev. L. Richards (Secretary), the Rev.
Dr. Orchard and Miss Maude Royden. This organisation still
exists, with headquarters at 17 Red Lion Square and P. W. Bartlett
as Secretary.
League of Peace and Freedom.—On July 8 and 9 the “ League
of Peace and Freedom ” was founded, with the object of “ carrying
on educational propaganda for peace in the widest sense.”
The Executive Committee included H. Baillie Weaver of the
Theosophical Society, S. V. Braeher, A. Honora Enfield, Charles
Weiss, etc. Hon. Secretary, Edward J. Smith.
The Women’s International League. -In the same year the
Women’s International League was founded, being the British
section of the “ International Committee of Women for Permanent
Peace,” formed at the Hague Congress for Women in April 1915.
An account of this will be given later in connection with the American
Pacifist movement.
The British W.I.L. was formally constituted on September 30
and October 1, 1915, at a General Meeting, and the resolutions
passed at the Hague Congress were accepted as a basis for defining
the objects of the W.I.L. “ It was agreed that the British organisa­
tion should be formed, with the object of linking together two
movements felt to be vitally connected : the Women’s movement
and the Pacifist movement. Headquarters were established at
12 Little College Street, Westminster, with the following personnel:
Chairman : Mrs. H. M. Swanwick.
Vice-Chairmen : Miss A. Maude Royden.
Miss Margaret Ashton.
Miss K. D. Courtney.
Hon. Secretary : Mrs. Pethick Lawrence.
Other members of the Executive Committee included Lady
Courtney of Penwith, Miss Margaret Bondfield, Mrs. Despard,
Mrs. Philip Snowden, Mrs. Bruce Glasier, Mrs. C. P. Trevelyan, etc.
Women's Peace Crusade.—A further development of the W.I.L.
was the Women’s Peace Crusade, run by Mrs. Philip Snowden.
Mrs. Helen Crawfurd, also of the Women’s International League
and now a member of the Communist Party, was the organiser of
THE WAR AND PACIFISM 35
36 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
the Crusade, which began operations on the Clyde on June 10,
1917. Her speeches were described as “ quite Bolshevik in tone ”
by the Morning Post, which went on to observe :
“ The Women’s Peace Crusade aimed a t creating a panicky feeling
am ong the women relatives of the soldiers. Mrs. Snowden was particu­
larly anxious th a t conditions should arise in this country th a t would
compel B ritain and her Allies to m ake peace w ith the Central Powers
before America could take a decisive p art in the war. This was
clearly stated a t a meeting a t Leicester in A ugust of last year ” (Morning
Post, series, “ Bolshevism in Great B ritain,” December 1918).
Workers’ Peace Council.—This organisation resulted in the
formation during the same year of the Workers’ Peace Council in
Glasgow, composed of representatives from the I.L.P., U.D.C.,
B. S.P., S.L.P., N.C.F., Clyde Workers’ Committee, etc., which
carried on continuous agitation on the Clyde.
National Council Against Conscription—National Council for
Civil Liberties.—At about the same date the National Council
against Conscription was organised by Adrian Stephen and Langdon-
Davies—the two principal organisers in the U.D.C. office. This
body, which later changed its name to the National Council for
Civil Liberties, had naturally the effect of disorganising national
warfare against Germany by organising anti-national warfare
against Great Britain. Its activities were almost exclusively
confined to munition and coal-producing (Morning Post,
Ibid.).
The President was Robert Smillie, and Secretary B. N. Langdon-
Davies, whilst the Executive Committee included Clifford Allen,
C. G. Ammon, Margaret Bondfield, Alexander Gossip, George
Lansbury, Robert Williams and H. W. Massingham.
1917 Club.—In 1917 a further organisation was founded
called the 1917 Club, combining Pacifism with definitely revolu­
tionary aims. The whole Executive Committee of the U.D.C.,
i.e. Norman Angell, J. A. Hobson, Ramsay Macdonald, E. D.
Morel, Arthur Ponsonby, Mrs. H. M. Swanwick and Charles Tre­
velyan, became members. The prospectus of the new club, which
was privately circulated, appealed to all “ those who desire that
the changes after the war should fundamentally alter the structure
of society” (Morning Post, September 12, 1917).
Amongst the signatories were the following :
W. C. Anderson
Margaret Bondfield (Trades Union Congress, Fabian Society,
I.L.P.)
G. Lowes Dickinson
Alexander Gossip (N.A.F.T.A.)
J. A. Hobson (Exec. Committee, U.D.C.)
Joseph King (I.L.P.)
THE WAR AND PACIFISM 37
Henry W. Nevinson (writer)
A. Maude Royden (writer and preacher)
Evelyn Sharp (journalist, later on staff of D aily Herald)
Ethel Snowden (Mrs. Philip Snowden) (I.L.P.)
Josiah C. Wedgwood (I.L.P.)
L. S. Woolf (writer, T.U.C., Labour Research Department).
There is, unfortunately, not space in this book to deal with the
various ramifications of Pacifism on the Continent, but a brief
survey of the movement in America must be given here.
In the United States, as in England, Pacifist societies came into
existence directly after the outbreak of the Great War, and there,
as here, showed themselves throughout consistently Socialist and
pro-German.
First Emergency Peace Federation.—As early as October 1914
the Emergency Peace Federation was organised by Louis P. Lochner,
Madame Rosika Schwimmer, a Hungarian Jewess and a German
agent ( Lusk Report, p. 971), who went to America as representatives
of the International Suffrage Alliance, together with Mrs. Pethick
Lawrence from England.
The preliminary meeting was held in Chicago on December 5,
1914, and was presided over by Miss Jane Addams. A committee was
formed to settle the War on the lines drawn up by the South German
Social Democrats, the Anti-War Council of Holland, the Inter­
national Peace Brethren and the U.D.C. of England. The direction
of the Federation was left almost entirely to well-known Socialist
leaders, including Morris Hillquit on the Executive Committee of
the Socialist Party of America, whilst Lochner was an American
citizen of German descent, concerned in Socialist publicity
organisation.
The legislative branch of the Emergency Peace Federation was
represented by the American Union Against Militarism, the American
Peace Society and the Women’s Peace Party.
American League to Limit Armaments.—On December 18 of
the same year (1914) the “ American League to Limit Armaments ”
was organised in New York by a committee including many of
the people who were at the same time active in the Emergency
Peace Federation of Chicago. These included Louis Lochner,
Morris Hillquit and Jane Addams.
National Peace Federation.—In March 1915 the Emergency
Peace Federation assumed the name of the National Peace Federa­
tion, and began to extend its activities to Europe.
Women’s International Committee for Permanent Peace.—
It was then that Jane Addams, Lochner, Rosika Schwimmer and
a number of other Pacifists went to Holland and convened the
Hague Congress on April 28, 1915, at which they organised the
“ Women’s International Committee for Permanent Peace,” re­
ferred to on page 35, of which the British section took the name of
38 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
the Women’s International League. Representatives of eighteen
countries were present and the following personnel was elected :
Chairman : Jane Addams.
Vice-Chairman : Dr. Aletta Jacobs.
Secretary : Chrystal Macmillan.
Treasurer pro tern. and Assistant Secretary : Rosa Manus.
The Central Bureau was instituted at Keisersgracht 467, Amster­
dam, and the official organ was the International.
American Neutral Conference.—In July 1916 the American
Neutral Conferencewas formed, under the Chairmanship of Hamilton
Holt, with Jane Addams and Dr. George Kirchwey amongst the
Vice-Chairmen, and with an Executive Committee which included
B. W. Huebsch, Bertha Kuntz Baker and the Rabbi Stephen Wise.
The organisation was largely carried out by Miss Rebecca Shelley.
“ This was short-lived ; starting in February and merging, before
the m iddle of the summer, into the F irst American Conference for
Democracy and Terms of Peace. B ut during the few m onths it
functioned it was exceptionally active in im planting thoughts antago­
nistic to the U nited States. Amongst those prom inent in this move­
m ent were Mrs. H enry Villard, Em ily Green Balch, Louis Lochner—
through all of the movements runs the activities of this man, now
safely enthroned as a Communist publicity agent in Berlin, etc.”
(Fred R. Marvin, Ye Shall Know the Truth, 1926, p. 14).
In February 1917 the American Neutral Conference Committee
in New York was transformed into a second Emergency Peace
Federation, with Mrs. Henry Villard as Chairman and a number of
the same Pacifists—Lochner, Rebecca Shelly, Dr. Kirchwey and
Emily Green Balch—amongst the promoters.
Fellowship of Reconciliation.—A number of these, as also Jane
Addams, figured again in the American branch of the “ Fellowship
of Reconciliation ”—constituted the same year under the leadership
of the Rev. Norman Thomas—and still again in the “ First American
Conference for Democracy and Terms of Peace,” which held its first
mass meeting in Madison Square on May 30, 1917, under the Chair­
manship of the Rabbi Judah L. Magnes, referred to in a Report by
the American miners as “ head of the Jewish Kehillah in New York
City ” ( Attem pt by Communists to seize the Am erican Labor
Movement. Prepared by the United Mine Workers of America,
Washington; Government Printing Office, January 1924).
By this time the Russian Revolution had taken place, and the
programme of the Conference was therefore to “ be in thorough
accord with that of the Russian Council of Workmen and Soldiers,”
so that the people of America should “ join hands with the people
of Russia” in securing a peace which could only at this juncture
be favourable to Germany.
From 1914 to 1917 Socialist activities were thus mainly
THE WAR AND PACIFISM 39
restricted to anti-war agitation redounding to the advantage of
Germany, since in Germany itself the firm action of the Imperial
Government and the nationalist character of the German Socialists
prevented Pacifist propaganda making headway. Only the Left
Wing Social Democrats, later to be known as Spartacists, led by
Karl Liebknecht, refused to vote for the war credits.
Zimmerwald Congress.—In September 1915 the Socialist Paci­
fists of eleven countries held an International Conference at Zimmer­
wald in Switzerland. No English delegates were allowed by the
Government to attend, but France, Germany, Italy and Russia were
all represented. A Manifesto was drawn up by the Conference
addressed to “ The Proletariats of all Nations,” accusing the
capitalists of bringing on the war and calling on the workers of the
world to condemn it.
Considering that the German delegates—Ledebour and Hoffman
—were amongst the signatories to this Manifesto, this might appear
to have been a genuine peace move, but German Imperialism had
its own agent at the Conference, in the person of Nicolai Lenin, who
was to be sent by the German General Staff two years later to Russia
in the famous sealed train, to bring about the collapse of the Russian
army and set up the Bolshevik regime. Thus the Zimmerwald
Congress paved the way for the Brest-Litovsk Treaty and the
establishment of the 3rd Internationale. Meanwhile revolutionary
propaganda was being carried on by the agents of German
Imperialism in the countries of the Allies. In England this was
only partially successful, producing merely a few strikes that served
to embarrass military operations—notably the railway strike of
1915 that delayed the transport of munitions to the front. Only
in Russia the agents of Germany met with complete success in the
autumn of 1917.
CHAPTER V
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
Up to this date we have seen the World Revolutionary movement
directed from several different quarters: from France during the
first French Revolution and the epoch of Utopian Socialism; from
the Marx-Engels faction in Switzerland in the sixties of the last
century, and in London later; then Anarchy carried West from
France and Russia; and finally Syndicalism arising in France,
passing over to America and thence to England. But in 1917 the
movement enters on a new phase, and Russia, hitherto the strong­
hold of autocratic monarchy, becomes the G.H.Q. of World
Revolution.
The G.H.Q., but not necessarily the real centre of direction !
People who are accustomed to regard the thing we call Bolshevism
as a modern sporadic growth—the outcome of the world-war and of
“ Tzarist tyranny ”—completely overlook the fact shown by the
chart accompanying this book that the whole spirit, the whole theory
and plan of campaign of Bolshevism existed long before the Bolsheviks
of R ussia came into existence ; what the coup d ’itat of November
1917 did was to establish a visible centre of direction in Moscow
which, with an army, vast wealth, a huge and fertile country at its
disposal, was able to carry Marx’s instructions from the domain of
theory into practice. The decrees of the Soviet Government were
simply the resolutions of the 1st Internationale passed into law.
The Bolsheviks, as has been shown, were in no way the outcome
of the Russian Revolutionary movement. Marxism, represented by
the Russian Social Democratic Party, which had developed from the
little “ Group for the Emancipation of Labour,” had never acquired
a powerful influence over the minds of the Russian “ revolutionary
proletariat.” The indigenous revolutionary movement in Russia
had always been Anarchist in character, whether of the violent
order represented by Bakunin and Kropotkine, or of the visionary
type represented by Tolstoi. At the same time the Social Revo­
lutionary Party, founded on the teaching of real Russians, such as
Lavroff, Ogareff and Herzen, and standing for the peasants rather
than for the industrial workers, had acquired a considerable follow­
ing, which in 1917 was divided into four groups—the Left Wing,
led by Maria Spiridmova, the Moderate Internationalists under
Tchernov, the People’s Social Party under Tschaikowsky, and the
40
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 41
Right Wing under Kerensky. This was the Party that made the
revolution of March 11-13,1917, that overthrew the monarchy and
formed the Provisional Government which ruled Russia up to the
moment of the Bolshevik coup d’Hat.
The Soviet.—At the same time the Socialist and Anarchist
elements of Petrograd had established a “ Soviet of Soldiers’, Work­
men’s and Sailors’ Deputies,” of which the first President was
Tcheidze, a Menshevik, with Kerensky the Social Revolutionary as
Vice-President. In May 1917 the Soviet forced the Cabinet of the
Provisional Government, headed by Prince Lvoff, to resign, and
Kerensky became Premier.
A month earlier Nicolai Lenin, who had been incubating Bol­
shevism in Switzerland with a Saxon-Jew, Fritz Platten (naturalised
as German-Swiss), as his principal associate, was sent to Russia
with a number of his supporters by the German Imperial Staff,
acting on the advice of a member of the German Social Democratic
Party—Helphand Parvus, alias Israel Lazarevitch. Lenin reached
Petrograd in the famous sealed train on the night of April 16,1917,
whilst Trotsky arrived from New York at almost the same moment.
On arrival, the Bolsheviks found themselves outnumbered by the
rival factions; on May 18 the Soviet vote showed only seven out of
forty-one to be in favour of Bolshevik theory, whilst at the first
meeting of 1,000 peasants from all parts of Russia, who formed the
All-Russian Congress of Peasants, it was found that hardly any
held Bolshevik views, the great majority being Social Revo­
lutionaries.
On July 17 the Bolsheviks made their first attempt to seize
the reins of power by force, but were defeated, and the leaders of
the rising—Lenin, Trotsky (alias Braunstein) and Zinoviev (alias
Apfelbaum)—escaped to Finland.
The Provisional Government, which had established a Liberal
rather than a Socialist regime, failed to follow up this victory and
consolidate its position by adopting firm measures. It would not
listen to General Kornilov when he urged the necessity for restoring
discipline in the army, and to General Kaledine, the elected repre­
sentative of the Cossacks, when he warned it that “ in the bitter
struggle for existence which Russia is now waging, it should utilise
all the Russian people, all the vital forces of all classes in Russia.”
“ The Provisional Government, however, remained deaf to all
appeals. I t feared to be accused of being reactionary. I t apparently
believed th a t the only m ethod to deal w ith the Socialist elements
which were underm ining its power m ust be to grant them greater
liberties and freedom to carry on their programme of national destruc­
tion ” (Lusk Report, I. 220).
A few months later :
“ The Provisional Government was overthrown, an event which
was the direct result of the oscillating, timorous and conciliatory policy
which it had always maintained towards domestic enemies ” (Lusk
Report, I. 220).
It was the old story of the Girondins paving the way for the
Terrorists, which was to be repeated again later in the case of
Hungary, with Karolyi in the role of Kerensky.
Bolsheviks.—On November 7, 1917 when Lenin and Trotsky,
who had returned from Finland, brought off their successful coup
d'etat which overthrew the Provisional Government, the Bolsheviks
were still in the minority. Not only were they outnumbered by
the Socialist Revolutionaries, but opposed by the Anarchists, and
also by the Right Wing of their own Party, the Mensheviks, who had
been in control of the Soviets since the March revolution. This
wing was itself divided into two factions—the Nationalists, under
the old Social Democratic leader, George Plechanov, and the Inter­
nationalists, under Martov.
Owing to skilful Bolshevik propaganda amongst the soldiers
and lack of leadership on the part of the anti-Bolshevik majority,
the Kerensky Government was forced, on this same day of
November 7, to abdicate. Petrograd wascaptured by the Red Guards,
and the Bolshevik Government was instituted, with Lenin and
Trotsky at the head. All resistance was then suppressed by
organised Terrorism.
The accession of the Bolsheviks to power transformed the whole
Socialist movement, not only by the inauguration of a visible centre
of direction, but by dividing the Marxian Socialists of every country
into the same two groups which were known in Russia under the
name of Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. Hitherto the Right and Left
Wings of the Social Democratic Parties everywhere had worked
together, but now that the principle of force had become practical
politics, the Left Wings, corresponding to the Bolsheviks of Russia,
definitely split off from the rest, and when the Bolshevik Party of
Russia decided to call itself officially the Communist Party, the
corresponding parties abroad followed suit. Thus the word Com­
munism, which in the past had covered all forms of Collectivism,
whether of the revolutionary or of the pacific and even religious
variety, came to signify the policy of instituting State Socialism by
means of violence and terrorism, as opposed to the institution of
the same system by means of legislation. It is important to under­
stand this point, because the perversion of the original meaning of
the word Communism has created much confusion of thought. In
reality all Socialists are Communists—as the Manifesto of the
United Socialist bodies of Great Britain in 1893 was ready to admit
—and the repudiation of the name by the Socialist opponents of
force has only been necessitated by its modern identification with
Bolshevism. As the late Adolphe Smith ably demonstrated, the
Bolsheviks of Russia were never sincere Communists, but a gang of
political adventurers sent in the first instance by Germany at the
42 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
TH E RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 43
instigation of Helphand Parvus “ to lay Russia low ”—as Luden-
dorff himself expressed it (see article by Adolphe Smith, “ Lenin,
Russian Traitor and German Agent,” in the National Review for
April 1921). Once in power, they made use only of the destructive
methods of Communism as interpreted by Karl Marx—the abolition
of private enterprise and of personal liberty—but never attempted
to put the principles of true Communism into practice by establishing
any semblance of equality. This explains why they were able
later to win the support of all destructionists, not only of State
Socialist variety, but of the former opponents of State Socialism—
the Syndicalists.
So a strange anomaly has been created—the Bolsheviks of
Russia, whilst calling themselves Communists, were never really
Communists at all; on the other hand, the so-called moderate
Marxian Socialists are in reality Communists because, whilst dis­
avowing the name, they continue to preach the doctrines of Com­
munism as formulated throughout the pre-Bolshevik era. All that
the latter really mean when they say they are not Communists is
that they do not wish to see the Socialist State inaugurated by means
of blood and terror, but by the pacific method of winning the
electorate over to their side.
It is this divergence of method which, since the rise of the
Bolsheviks to power, has divided the Socialist movement into two
camps, not opposed in aim, but only in method, and marching
towards the same goal by different routes. These two camps are
now led by the 2nd and 3rd Internationales.
The 3rd Internationale.—The idea of forming the 3rd Inter­
nationale was first made known on January 24, 1919, when a
wireless message went out from Moscow to the revolutionaries of
other lands. That message was the first invitation to the Inaugural
Conference of the 3rd or Communist Internationale ” (R. Palme
Dutt, The Two Internationals, p. 22).
The aims and methods of the new organisation were described
as follows :
“ (1) The seizure of the governmental power in order to replace
it by the apparatus of proletarian power ; (2) the disarm ing of the
bourgeoisie and the general arm ing of the proletariat in order to m ake
the revolution secure ; (3) the use of the dictatorship to suppress
private property in the means of production and transfer it ‘ to the
proletarian State under the Socialist adm inistration of the working
class.’ The m ethod is *the mass-action of the proletariat as far as
open conflict w ith arm s against the governm ental power of capitalism ’ ”
(Ibid., p. 24).
The 2nd Internationale.—In opposition to this programme of
violence, the more moderate Socialists now made an effort to revive
the 2nd Internationale, which, as has been said, went into abeyance
on the outbreak of War. Its last Congress had been held at Copen­
hagen in 1910.
44 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Accordingly in February 1919—the month after the message had
gone out from Moscow—a Conference of Labour and Socialist
bodies, both political and industrial, met at Berne. Twenty-six
countries, including Great Britain, France, Germany and Italy,
were represented. The Belgian Labour Party and the American
Federation of Labour refused to attend, being unwilling to meet
the Germans. The Swedish leader, Branting, was elected President.
This was not in reality a meeting of the old 2nd Internationale,
but it prepared the way for its reorganisation. At this Conference
the difference of opinion on the Russian question became apparent,
the majority under Branting repudiating Bolshevism, the minority
under the Austrian-Jew Friedrich Adler and the French-Jew
Longuet, grandson of Karl Marx, opposing the placing of any
stigma on the Russian Soviet Republic (Palme Dutt, The Two
Itilernationals, p. 16).
Foundation of the 3rd Internationale.—In the following month,
at a Conference held in Moscow from March 2-6, 1919, the Russian
Bolsheviks founded the 3rd or Communist Internationale, sometimes
known as the “ Komintern ” from a combination of the Russian
words Kommunistitcheski Internazional.
Thirty-two delegates were present representing twelve countries
—Russia, Germany, Hungary, German-Austria, Sweden, Norway,
Bulgaria, Roumania, Finland, Ukrainia, Esthonia and Armenia.
In addition to these accredited delegates were individuals connected
with the Socialist movements in other countries, some of whom took
an active part in the work of the Conference; these included
Rakovsky of the Balkan Socialist Federation, A. Guilbeaux and
Captain Jacques Sadoul, both of the French Socialist Party, and
Fritz Platten of the Swiss Socialist Party.
The Manifesto of the Conference, issued on September 8, 1919,
calling upon the revolutionaries of the world, whether Socialist,
Syndicalist or Anarchist, to unite as soon as possible and form a
unified Communist Party, was drafted by a committee consisting of
Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Rakovsky and Fritz Platten. Zinoviev,
alias Radomislsky, alias Apfelbaum, alias Ovse Gershon Aronovitch,
was elected President of the Executive Committee—known as the
I.K.K.I. (from the initials of the Russian words Ispolnitelni Kom-
mitet Kommunistitcheskovo Internazionala) and has occupied that
position ever since. Amongst those who later formed the Execu­
tive were W. Maclaine and Tom Quelch of the B.S.P., Jack Tanner
and J. T. Murphy of the Factory and Works Committee of England,
Jacques Sadoul, A. Rosmer and Delignet for France, L. Fraina and
A. Stoklitsky of the American Communist Party, D. Bilan of the
American Communist Labour Party, the Jewish leader of the
Dutch Communists, D. Wynkoop, whilst the Petrograd Committee
of the Russian Communist Party was represented by N. Bukharin,
V. Vorovsky (later murdered in Switzerland by Conradi), G. Klinger
and Angelica Balabanova—a well-known woman revolutionary
who had acted as a German agent during the War (General
Spiridovitch, L’Histoire du Bolchbnsme., Russian edition, p. 279).
A special invitation to the Conference had been sent to Sen
Katayama, leader of the Socialist groups of Tokio and Yokohama,
who has since played a leading part in the Japanese Communist
movement and even in the World Revolution.
The foundation of the Komintern brought matters to a crisis,
and the Socialist Parties of the world were called upon to decide
between the principles of the two Internationales. As a result, the
British, French, Belgian, Dutch and Swedish parties, the German
Majority Socialists, etc., retained their allegiance to the 2nd Inter­
nationale, whilst the Norwegian Labour Party, Swedish Left Socialist
Party, Hungarian Communist Party, Swiss Social Democratic
Party, Italian Socialist Party, etc., declared for affiliation with the
3rd Internationale.
Amsterdam Conference—Lucerne Conference.—A further at­
tempt was now made to revive the 2nd Internationale. A second
Conference met at Amsterdam in April 1919, and a third at Lucerne
in the following August, and it was then decided to call a General
Congress, not a Conference, at Geneva in February 1920. This
was later postponed till July 31, and then at last, in August 1920,
the 2nd Internationale, contemptuously described by the Bolsheviks
as the Yellow Internationale, was definitely reconstituted at
Geneva.
The 2nd Internationale Reconstituted.—Many of the people
who helped to organise it had, however, nothing to do with the old
2nd Internationale; as, for example, Tom Shaw, who was appointed
Chairman of the Geneva Congress. Adolphe Smith, of the S.D.F.,
Official Anglo-French Interpreter at the Congresses of the 2nd
Internationale, thus comments on the character of the revived
organisation :
“ One feature, and this is the worst feature, of the Second In ter­
national was m aintained a t Geneva. The very same individuals who
had pulled the strings in such a m anner th a t the Second International
had degenerated into a Pan-Germ an Association were allowed yet
again to decide w hat nations should be represented and how m any
votes they should have. I t was therefore perfectly certain beforehand
th a t the German influence would predom inate a t Geneva, in August
1920, as it did when the Second International last m et a t Copenhagen,
in 1910 ” (The Times, June 21, 1921).
This being the state of affairs, the S.D.F. “ took good care not
to go to Geneva,” but the I.L.P. and Labour Party delegates who
attended showed themselves “ more pro-German than the Germans
themselves ” (Adolphe Smith in private correspondence).
The 2nd Internationale then decided to remove its bureau,
i.e. Executive Committee, from Brussels to London, with Camille
Huysmans as one of the three General Secretaries.
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 46
46 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The 3rd Internationale Congress.—At the same moment that the
“ Yellow Internationale ” was being reconstituted in Geneva the
Red Internationale was holding its Second Congress, which on
July 19, 1920, met at Petrograd, and then continued its sessions in
Moscow from July 23 to August 7.
This time it was able to call itself a “ World Congress,” for
no less than thirty-seven countries were represented. The French
Socialist Party, the American Socialist Party and the German
Independent Party sent delegates. The most important countries
were represented as follows :
Russia : N. Lenin, G. Zinoviev, N. Bukharin, L. Trotsky.
Germany : P. Levy, E. Meyer, J. Walcher, R. Wolfstein.
German-Austria : K. Steinhardt, K. Toman, Stromer.
F rance : A. Rossm er, F . Sadoul, A. G uilbeaux.
England : T. Quelch, W. Gallagher, Sylvia Pankhurst, W. Mac-
Laine.
America : Flynn, A. Fraina, A. Bilan, John Reed.
Italy : D. MTSerrati, N. Bombacci, Graziadei, A. Bordiga.
Norway : A. Fries, Shefflo, A. Madsen.
Sweden : K. Dalstrom, Samuelson, Winberg.
Denmark : 0. Jorgenson, M. Nilsen.
Holland : Wynkoop, Jansen, Van Leuven.
Spain : Pestana.
Switzerland : Herzog, J. Humbert-Droz.
Hungary : Rakoszy, A. Rudniamsky, Varga.
Poland : U. Marchlevsky.
India : Ashtaria, Sheffik, Roy.
At this second Congress the attitude of the Komintern was made
clear on two important points : Parliamentarian!sm and Syndicalism.
With regard to the former, it was frankly stated that the aim of
the Communists was to destroy parliamentarianism which “ has
become a ‘democratic ’ form of the rule of the bourgeoisie.” At
the same time Communists should not refrain from participating
in a political campaign on the score that parliament is a bourgeois
government institution. “ The Communist Party enters such
institutions not for the purpose of organisation work, but in order
to blow up the whole bourgeois machinery and the parliament
itself from within.” Hence Anti-Parliamentarianism “ in the sense
of an absolute and categorical repudiation of participation in the
elections and the parliamentary revolutionary work . . . is a naive
and childish doctrine” (The Communist Internationale, official
organ of the Komintern, No. 13, pp. 2405-2407).
As to revolutionary Syndicalism and Industrialism, these
“ are a step forward only in comparison with the old, musty,
counter-revolutionary ideology of the 2nd Internationale. But in
comparison with the revolutionary Marxian doctrine, they were a
step backwards . . . the views of Syndicalism and Industrialism
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 47
. . . are reactionary. The working-class cannot achieve a com­
plete victory over the bourgeoisie by means of the General Strike
alone, and by the policy of ‘folded arms.’ The proletariat must
resort to an armed uprising ” (The Communist Internationale, pp.
2386 and 2452). Meanwhile “ iron discipline is the first command­
ment of the Communists ” ( Ibid., p. 2454).
So on the one hand constitutional government and on the other
revolutionary Syndicalism were to be made use of for their own
destruction and the triumph of the red bureaucracy of Moscow.
The foundation of the 3rd Internationale had immensely
facilitated the spread of Bolshevism by providing the Soviet
Government with a camouflage for its activities. No longer could
groups or individuals working in co-operation with Moscow be
accused of having dealings with a foreign power, but only with an
independent Socialist organisation. To correspond with Zinoviev,
member of the Executive Committee of the Russian Socialist Soviet
Republic, was one thing, to communicate with him as President of
the I.K.K.I (Executive Committee of the Communist International)
was quite another matter. So well did this ruse succeed, that for a
year or two the Governments of Western Europe continued to
differentiate between the Soviet Government and the Komintern,
although the same men were at the head of each. The point was
only cleared up when it was proved conclusively that, as shown in
the diagram at the end of this book, the Political Bureau of the
Russian Communist Party controlled both tho TS.I.K. (Central
Executive Committee) of the Russian Government and also the
I.K.K.I.
West European Secretariat.—By the end of 1919 the Komintern
had spread its tentacles all over Europe. In December of that year
the West European Secretariat of the 3rd Internationale, a mar­
vellous organisation controlling a network of smaller organisations,
both open and secret, was established at a Conference attended by
delegates from Russia, Poland, Germany, Austria, Roumania and
Great Britain. At a further Conference at Amsterdam in February
1920, it was decided to mark off this Secretariat as a Central Euro­
pean Secretariat, with headquarters at Vienna (later known colloqui­
ally as the D.I.K.I.), and to set up a new Western Secretariat at
Amsterdam. A Southern European Bureau of the 3rd Interna­
tionale and an Eastern Secretariat of Propaganda, comprising the
Far East, were established later.
CHAPTER VI
WORLD BOLSHEVISM
We shall now follow the course of the Communist movement in
various countries of the world after the Bolshevik Revolution.
Bolshevism in Germany
The first country to follow suit was Germany, where State
Socialism had always been strong, but where Bolshevism had been
least able to obtain a permanent foothold. The Bolshevik regime
met with instant opposition from the Right Wing of the German
Social Democratic Party under Scheidemann and the Centre under
Karl Kautsky, who published a denunciation of Terrorism which
met with a derisive reply from Trotsky.
The German Spartacists.—The Left Wing, however, known as
the Spartacists, led by Karl Liebknecht, with Franz Mehring and
the two Jewesses, Rosa Luxemburg and Clara Zetkine, attempted
a rising in Berlin on December 25, 1918. Street fighting con­
tinued until January 15, 1919, when the Government succeeded in
suppressing the movement, and Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg
were killed by the mob. Spartacist riots also took place in Bremen,
Brunswick, Hamburg and other cities, but only met with some
success in Munich, where during three weeks of March 1919 the
Spartacists gained the upper hand.
In 1921 a rising was attempted under the leadership of Max
Heltz, and a further one in 1923, which also proved abortive.
Since the end of 1924 the influence of the Communists has decreased
in favour of the Social Democrats. The membership of both parties
is still large—that of the Communist Party being larger than in
any other country—but although their figures may look formidable
on paper, they have not prevented the rise of Field-Marshal von
Hindenburgto power nor impeded the prosperityof German industry.
The principal organ of the German Socialists is still Vorwdrts,
and that of the Communists Die Rothe Fahne.
Bolshevism in France
In France the national spirit at first showed itself resistant to
the anti-patriotic propaganda of Bolsheviks, and the Internationalist
faction in the French Socialist Party remained in the minority.
48
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 49
Under the influence of Trotsky and other Bolsheviks, Jean
Longuet, grandson of Karl Marx and leader of the Centre, associated
himself with Pressemane, Frossard and others to form the moderate
section of the Left Wing, of which the extreme section was led by
Loriot, Rappoport, Marcel Cachin and others.
In 1918 the tide turned in favour of Internationalism, and at a
National Council of the French Socialist Party held in July of that
year, the former ‘minoritaires ’ secured a clear majority. Fraternal
greetings were sent both to the German Socialists—with eulogistic
references to Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg—and also to the
Russian Soviet Government. Two so-called Communist groups
were now formed, but these were in the main led by Syndicalists,
and it was not until two years later that the present Communist
Party was formed. This was the outcome of the Congress, which
took place at Tours in December 1920, when the party known as
the “ French Unified Socialist Party ” gave their adhesion to the
3rd Internationale and became officially known as the French
Communist Party.
This decisive step seems to have been largely brought about
by two Jewish emissaries from Lenin, both Spartacists—Clara
Zetkine and Abramovitch (alias Zalewsky, alias Albreicht) one of
the most trusted councillors of Trotsky and a member of the
Tcheka, who had been sent from Moscow by Lenin at the end of
November to direct Bolshevist propaganda in the West of Europe.
Both of them were present at the Tours Congress, where Abramo­
vitch was referred to as “ the eye of Moscow.” At the end of
January Abramovitch and eight of his associates were arrested by
the French police, and the Bolshevist plot in France was believed to
have been defeated. But the Communist Party still continues to
exist in that country, with a membership of no less than 57,000,
and has for its present leaders Marcel Cachin, Vaillant Couturier,
Jean Doriot, Andre Marty, Semard, Treint, Monmousseau,
Renaud Jean, etc.
The organ of the Party is L’HumanM.
The French Socialist Party is led at present by Herriot, Caillaux
and Leon Blum, with La France Libre for its organ.
Bolshevism in Italy
From the beginning of the Bolshevist regime in Russia, the
Italian Socialists proclaimed their sympathy with Communism and
approval of Lenin and Trotsky. These sentiments were openly
expressed at the Rome Conference in October 1918. Consequently
the Italian Socialist Party held aloof from the Conferences of the
2nd Internationale, and “ was the first Socialist Party of power and
influence to ally itself with the 3rd Internationale. This important
step was taken by the National Executive Committee of the Party,
which met in March 1919 at Milan” (Lusk Report, I. 93). At
50 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
the Bologna Conference of October 1919 the Soviet faction under
Serrati secured an overwhelming majority over the moderate wing
under Lazzari and Turati and the anti-parliamentarian group under
Bordiga. It was then decided to overthrow the monarchy and
parliamentary government and replace them by the Soviet system.
A complete scheme was drawn up by N. Bombacci and printed in
AvayUi for January 28, 1920.
But the tendency of the Italian revolutionary movement had
always been towards Anarchism and Syndicalism, and found ex­
pression in the seizure of factories by the F.I.O.M. (Federazione
italiane operai metallurgichi, or Metallurgical Workers’Federation),
which met with no opposition from the timorous government.
“ The Government refused absolutely to intervene to protect
private property. As a matter of fact, it did not dare intervene.
The troops could not have been moved. The railway men would
have struck. The soldiers might have refused. . . It was the
same story as in France, Russia and Hungary before the Revolution.
Only in Italy events took a different turn, and the weakness of
government led to a great national movement, which crushed the
revolution and established Fascismo in its place. Owing to the
intensified campaign against Mussolini, the public in this country
has to a great extent forgotten that Italy was passing rapidly into
chaos when the former Socialist leader took over the reins of power.
The factories had been seized and abandoned, the workers proving
quite unable to run them, the inscription “ Viva Lenin ! ” was seen
everywhere, peaceful citizens were threatened. Fascismo alone
stemmed the tide of Bolshevism flowing westwards. It may be that
Mussolini was not only the saviour of Italy but of all Europe.
Bolshevism in Belgium
Before the war the Labour Party was strong in Belgium, under
the leadership of Vandervelde and Camille Huysmans. At the same
time Brussels was the centre of International Socialism, being the
headquarters of the 2nd Internationale.
After 1919 a Belgian section of the 3rd Internationale was formed
under the name of the Belgian Communist Party, with a member­
ship of 5,000 that has now risen to 35,000.
The leader is Will van Overstraeten, and the official organs of
the Party are the Drapeau Rouge (daily) and the Roode Vaan
(weekly). The headquarters are at 59 rue des Alexiens, Brussels.
Bolshevism in Holland
Social Democratic Labour Party.—The Social Democratic Labour
Party of Holland had been founded in 1894 by Troelstra and eleven
others. In 1910 a more strictly Marxian group was formed, calling
itself the Social Democratic Party, led by a Jew, D. Wynkoop,
who, with van Ravesteyn and Ceton, formed the directorate. It
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 51
was this body which sent representatives to the Zimmerwald Con­
ference and afterwards joined the 3rd Internationale and changed
its name to the Communist Party.
Communist Workers’ Party.—A split took place in 1920, when
the Communist Workers’ Party was formed.
The leaders of the Communist Party in 1924, of which the
membership was only, 1,500 were as follows :
Political Department:
D. Wynkoop, on the Executive of the 3rd Internationale.
Dr. van Ravesteyn, doctor of literature and author.
Ceton, a schoolmaster.
H. Sneevliet, a former railway employe.
Van der Glas.
Organising Department:
L. L. H. de Visser (elected chairman in 1925).
Brommert.
Sterringa.
Mrs. Stamm-Ponsen.
Bouvman.
Youth Organisation : De Zaler
Van Lakerveld.
Amongst the intellectuals connected with the movement were
Mrs. J. Roland Holst, an authoress; Baars and Brandsteder,
engineers banished from India; and Colthoff, employed in the
Colonial Office.
Recently another split has taken place, and the more extreme
section has taken the name of the Bond van Kommunistische Stryd
en Propaganda Clubs (B.K.S.P.).
The organs of the Communist Party of Holland are : De Tribune
and De Klassenstryd (the Class Struggle), whilst the Left Wing Trade
Union movement, known as the Fimmen group, publishes Eenheit
(Unity).
Several revolutionary organisations have been formed in the
Dutch East Indies (see The Patriot for April 23, 1925).
Bolshevism in Switzerland
The Bolshevik Revolution, as has been said, was mainly organised
in Switzerland, where Lenin had for his principal associate Fritz
Platten, the secretary of the Swiss Social Democratic Party. Switzer­
land ever since the middle of the last century has always been a centre
for revolutionary plotting, and during the war it became also a
centre of pan-German propaganda. But as this was conducted on
the basis of a secret organisation, it does not enter into the scope
of this book.
After the inauguration of the Bolshevik regime efforts were
made to turn Swiss Social Democracy in the direction of Moscow,
52 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
and a bureau for Bolshevist propaganda was established by a
number of emissaries from Russia, headed by Jean Berzine and Lip-
nitski in co-operation with Platten, who was present at the 1st
Congress of the Komintern in Moscow.
The allegations concerning the bribing by the Germans of the
Swiss Socialist Robert Grimm, who was associated with the Ger­
man agents Rakovsky and Angelica Balabanova, had the effect,
however, of uniting a great majority of the Swiss Socialists against
the 3rd Internationale.
Although a Communist Party now exists in Switzerland number­
ing 3,500 members, it presents no immediate danger.
Bolshevism in Austria
Before the War the Social Democratic Labour Party of Austria
was led by Victor Adler, a Jew, father of Friedrich Adler, who
during the W'ar became the leader of the middle Left Wing of the
Socialist Party. It was Friedrich who in 1916murdered the Austrian
Prime Minister, Count Sturgkh, and later became one of the two
General Secretaries of the L.S.I.
At first a defender of the Soviet regime, Adler ended by strongly
denouncing it.
On the advent of the Bolsheviks to power in Russia, a Communist
Party was formed in Austria, and an attempt was made to bring
about a revolution on November 2, 1918. This was suppressed, and
the Communist Leaders, Friedliinder and Steinhart, were arrested.
Further attempts were made in April 1919 and in June 1919, but
both were successfully defeated by the police, though not without
bloodshed on both sides.
An Austrian Communist Party still exists, however, under the
leadership of Otto Bauer, the former leader of the Social Democrats.
Bolshevism in Hungary
In Hungary a Communist regime and Red Terror was inaugu­
rated by a Directorate of Five, headed by an emissary of Moscow,
Bela Kun, in March 1919, and lasted until August 1, when the
Jewish camarilla were put to flight by Admiral Horthy and the
troops of the Allies. Bela Kun escaped to Germany, and from
thence went back to Russia to rejoin Lenin and Trotsky.
Every attempt to bring about revolution was after this checked
by the band of Monarchists known as the Move or the Awakening
Magyars, led by the Deputy Gombos.
Nevertheless, a Hungarian Communist Party still exists, although
declared illegal.
Bolshevism in Scandinavia
Before the War Socialism was mainly represented in Scandinavia
by the Majority Socialists of Sweden, with the moderate leader
Hjalmar Branting at their head. On the foundation of the 3rd
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 53
Internationale, however, the Left Wing of the Swedish Socialist
Party and the Norwegian Labour Party, which was represented at
the 1st Congress in Moscow, declared for affiliation. Of the two
countries, Norway showed itself the more revolutionary. The
leader of the Norwegian Left Wing Socialists was Martin Tranmael,
who in the spring of 1918 succeeded in getting himself made secre­
tary of the Norwegian Labour Party, whilst another Bolshevik,
M. Scheflo, gained control of the official organ of the Party, the
Socialdemokrat. Tranmael proved an apt disciple of Lenin, and
openly declared his contempt for democratic government as ex­
pressed by majorities : “ It is the great stupid mass that decides
elections ; and we cannot tolerate that ” (Morning Post, October 14,
1919). Accordingly Tranmael, Scheflo, a post master Eugene
Nissen, and a lawyer Emil Stang, constituted themselves as the
minority which should assume control over the Norwegian people.
Before long they had secured a majority in the Labour Party, and
throughout 1919 Norway became the scene of the wildest Bolshevist
excesses, and one strike followed on another. But at the Congress
of Left Wing Scandinavian Socialists, which met in Stockholm on
December 8 and 10, 1919, a split took place between the Socialists
and Syndicalists, and the latter won the day. By 1921 the moderate
Norwegian Socialists, momentarily crushed for want of funds,
succeeded in asserting themselves and started a paper, which has
now resumed the old title of Socialdemokrat, whilst the organ of the
Communists is now the Arbeiderbladet, with the same offices as the
Labour Press Bureau and the Norwegian Labour Party in the
Folkets Hus (People’s House), 13Youngstaten, Oslo. Schisms have
recently taken place in the Communist Party, and opposition groups
have been formed. Scheflo, P. Moe Johansen and Falk deserted
from the main body, and the last named has denounced Tranmael
as not sufficiently revolutionary, and has founded a paper of his
own, Mot Dag (Towards Day). In retaliation, Einer Gerhardsen
advocated the expulsion of Falk and his followers.
The principal representatives of Soviet Russia in Norway were,
until recently, Alexandre Koznekow, Consul at Tromso ; Nicolaieff,
chief of the Russian Trade Delegation, and Mme. Alexandre
Kollontai, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Russian Republic in
Norway and author of several books on Bolshevism, notably
Communism and the Family, which advocates the emancipation
of women from all domestic ties. Mme. Kollontai has just resigned
her post (February 1926), owing to differences with Litvinov and
Zinoviev.
Bolshevism in America
American Anarchists.—In America during the pre-war period the
revolutionary movement has been, as we have seen, largely Anarchist
and Syndicalist in character. During the War the Anarchists, led
54 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
by Alexander Berkman and Emma Goldman, were intimately con­
nected with the Pacifist movement. Their official organs were
Mother Earth and The Blast; at the same time they distributed
a large number of anonymous pamphlets. They were also the
organisers of the “ No Conscription League,” at the offices of which,
in New York City, they were arrested on June 15, 1917, and sub­
sequentlyindicted for violation of the Espionage Act and imprisoned.
Their fellow Anarchists thereupon organised the League of
Amnesty of Political Prisoners, with M. Eleanor Fitzgerald as
secretary.
At the beginning of the Bolshevik regime the American
Anarchists sent messages of congratulation to Lenin and Trotsky,
although not identifying themselves with Bolshevism. One group,
calling itself “ The American Anarchist Federated Commune
Soviets,” carried on a violent campaign through an organ named the
Anarchist Soviet Bulletin, expressing sympathy with the Soviet
regime, despite the fact that in Russia tbeir brother Anarchists
were, being suppressed with the utmost vigour.
Anarchist Communism.—It was no longer, however, the pure
Anarchism of Proudhon or of Bakunin that these groups repre­
sented, but a kind of hybrid theory called Anarchist Communism—
with Workers’ Soviets as its final objective and approximating to
Anarcho-Syndicalism in its advocacy of the General Strike.
Socialist Party o! America.—Meanwhile the various Socialist
organisations of America were taking a new form. The Socialist
Labour Party had split in 1899 and the Socialist Party of America
in 1912. “ In 1916 a number of the extremists organised the
Socialist Propaganda League at Boston and issued a newspaper
known as The New International. In April 1917 The Class Struggle
appeared” (Congressional Record, “ Recognition of Russia,”
Part II, p. 238. 1924).
People’s Council of America.—The first repercussion of the
Russian Revolution in America was the formation of the “ People’s
Council of America,” founded in June 1917—that is to say, four
months before the advent of the Bolsheviks to power—and modelled
on the Council of Workmen’s and Soldiers’ Soviet of Russia. The
executive secretary was Louis Lochner; Rebecca Shelly was
financial secretary and Dr. David Starr Jordan was treasurer.
Amongst the members of the committee were well-known Socialist
leaders, such as Eugene V. Debs, Max Eastman, editor of Masses
(New York), Morris Hillquit (alias Misca Hilkowicz), now Interna­
tional Secretary of the Socialist Party, James H. Maurer, the Rabbi
Judah L. Magnes, and Benjamin Schlesinger, president of the
International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union.
Although the plan drawn up by Lochner and Miss Shelly followed
closely on Soviet lines, the Socialistic character of the People’s
Council was first camouflaged as a national movement. In August
1917 Roger Baldwin, an ally of •Lochner’s, wrote to the latter:
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 55
“ Do steer aw ay from m aking it look like a Socialist enterprise.
Too m any people have already gotten the idea th a t it is nine-tenths
a Socialist movement. . . . Do get into the m ovem ent ju st as strong
as possible the leaders in the labour circles. . . .
“ We w ant also to look like patriots in everything we do. We
w ant to get a lot of good flags, talk a good deal about the Constitution
and w hat our forefathers w anted to m ake of this country, and to
show th a t we are the folks th a t really stand for the spirit of our insti­
tutions.”
Lochner replied :
“ I agree w ith you th a t we should keep proclaiming our loyalty
and patriotism , I will see to it th a t we have flags and sim ilar para­
phernalia.” (Lusk Report, pp. 1057, 1058.)
All the tactics of social revolution are embodied in these lines.
Throughout the years 1917 and 1918 a Left Wing of the Socialist
Party of America was developing with a more and more pronounced
tendency towards Communism. A Communist propaganda league
was formed in Chicago in November 1918; during the same year
the Boston branch of the Socialist Party began the publication of
The Revolutionary Age, which advocated Communist tactics and
was edited by a Mexican-Jew, named Louis Friana (Congressional
Record, “ Recognition of Russia,” Part II, p. 238, and Lusk Report,
p. 684).
Left Wing of Socialist Party.—These activities led to the definite
formation of a Left Wing Section of the Socialist Party at a meeting
held in the Rand School of Social Science in New York on Feb­
ruary 15, 1919. Maximilian Cohen was elected as executive secre­
tary ; L. L. Wolfe, later succeeded by Fanny Horowitz, as recording
secretary, and another Jewess, Rose Pastor Stokes, as treasurer.
The Executive Committee was selected, consisting of the following :
Benjamin Gitlow, Nicholas I. Hourwich, George Lehman, James
Larkin (the Irish agitator), L. Himmelfarb, George C. Vaughn,
Benjamin Corsor, Edward I. Lindgren and Maximilian Cohen.
Foreign Language Federations.—The strikingly un-American
character of the new movement may be partly accounted for by
the fact that it was inspired by various foreign language federations,
which formed branches of the Socialist Party, notably by the so-
called “ Russian Socialist Federation,” led by Alexander Stoklitzky,
Oscar Tywerowsky and Michael Mislig, with the Novy Mir, edited
by Gregory Weinstein, as its official organ (Lusk Report, p. 676).
This committee paved the way for the Communist Party of
America.
In the following month, when the 3rd Internationale was founded
in Russia, S. J. Rutgers was appointed by the Left Wing Section
to represent it at the Congress. The Socialist Labour Party,
which had been one of the signatories to the invitation convening
the Congress, was represented by Boris Reinstein.
56 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
In June a National Conference of the Left Wing Socialists met
in New York to discuss the definite formation of a Communist
Party, but decided that a decision should be delayed until Sep­
tember, in order meanwhile “ to rally all the revolutionary elements.”
A minority, composed of Michigan delegates and those representing
the Russian Socialist Federation, decided, however, on immediate
action, and after withdrawing from the Conference formed a
National Organisation Committee which issued in the Novy Mir
for July 7, 1919, a “ Call for a National Convention for the purpose
of organising a Communist Party in America.” This was signed
by Dennis E. Batt, D. Elbaum, 0. C. Johnson, John Keracher, S.
Kopnagel, I. Stilson and Alexander Stoklitzky. On July 19 this
committee published the first number of The Communist, as the
official organ of the new party.
Communist Party of America.—It was not, however, until
September 1, 1919, that the Communist Party of America was
definitely founded at a Conference in Chicago. An Executive
Committee was formed consisting of Charles E. Ruthenberg, Louis
C. Fraina, Isaac E. Ferguson, Schwartz of the Lettish Federation
of Boston, Karosses of the Lithuanian Federation of Philadelphia,
Dirba, secretary of the Minnesota Socialist Party, and H. M. Wicks,
a Communist from Oregon. Harry M. Winitsky was elected
secretary in New York. Amongst other important leaders of the
Party were those who had figured in the Left Wing Socialist Section
—Isaac A. Hourwich, Alexander Stoklitzky, D. Elbaum, Bittleman,
editor of the Jewish Federation paper Der Kampf, Jay Lovestone,
Maximilian Cohen, etc.
The Constitution drawn up by the Party declared its adherence
to the 3rd Internationale, and the report addressed to the I.K.K.I.
prepared by Fraina ended with these words :
“ The Communist P arty realises the im m ensity of its task ; it
realises th a t the final struggle of the Communist proletariat will be
waged in the U nited States, our conquest of power alone assuring the
W orld Soviet Republic. Realising all this, the Communist P arty
prepares for the struggle.
“ Long live the Communist In tern atio n al! Long live the World
Revolution ! ” (Lusk Report, p. 756.)
“ A fter the Chicago convention the work of organising locals and
branches proceeded rapidly. The local for G reater New York was
organised, w ith H arry M. W initsky as Executive Secretary. Its
headquarters were moved from the place occupied by the old Left
W ing a t 43 W est Tw enty-ninth Street to 207 E ast Tenth Street, and
a new weekly publication was established as the official organ of the
Communist P arty, Local Greater New York. This paper was called
Communist World. Maximilian Cohen was elected editor ; Bertram
D. Wolfe associate editor, and George Ashkenouzi business manager.
The first issue of this periodical appeared on November 1, 1919.”
(Lusk Report, p. 758.)
The propaganda of the Party in New York City was definitely
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 57
“ anti-parliamentary,” and a proclamation was issued ending with
the words in capitals : “ BOYCOTT THE ELECTIONS !”
But already a split had taken place in the ranks of Communism.
As we have seen, the National Organisation Committee, composed of
Michigan delegates and those from the language Federations that
had formed the Communist Party, had at first constituted a minority
at the Left Wing Conference in June. Though they later succeeded
in drawing over a majority of the National Council of the Left Wing
to support their call for immediate action. Certain members of
the Left Wing Council, as well as a number of locals and branches
which had endorsed the Left Wing movement, continued, however,
to entertain the hope of capturing the Socialist Party machinery.
“ All through July the Federations were maligning the Left Wing
Council as centrists, as a fetid swamp. Meanwhile the Council
was maligning Michigan as parliamentarian and non-Bolsheviks,
and both Michigan and the Federations as petty political intriguers ”
(Lusk Re-port, p. 800).
Communist LabourParty.—As a result of these disputes a number
of Left Wing delegates presented themselves at the Socialist Party
Emergency Convention on August 30, 1919, in Chicago, but were
excluded, whereupon they appointed a committee of five to meet
the Organisation Committee of the Communist Party formed on
September 1, and later a like committee of the Communist Con­
vention for the purpose of seeking unity. These negotiations came
to nothing, so the delegates organised themselves into a separate
Convention and formed the “ Communist Labour Party ” with a
programme identical to that of the Communist Party, except in
its policy of using the present political machinery for propaganda
purposes. The Convention elected A. Wagenknecht executive
secretary, and as members of the National Executive Committee,
M. Bedacht, of California ; Alexander Bilan, Ohio ; Jack Carney,
Minnesota; L. E. Katterfeld, Kansas; Edward Lingren, New
York. Prominent in the organisation were also Charles Baker,
Ohio; James Larkin, the Irish agitator; Benjamin Gitlow, New
York; John Reed, Ludwig Lore and Charles Krumbein. National
Headquarters were opened in Cleveland, Ohio (Lusk Report, p. 801,
and Congressional Record, “ Recognition of Russia,” Part II, p.
239). The official organ of the Party was Communist Labor.
The Communist Labour Party was from the first affiliated to
the 3rd Internationale, and delegates were sent to the 2nd Congress
in July and August 1920, where the Communist Party was also
represented.
By the autumn of 1919,however,the attention of the Government
had been aroused with regard to the activities of the revolutionary
elements in the United States, and in June the Russian Soviet
Bureau, the Rand School and the headquarters of the I.W.W. and
the Left Wing Section of the Socialist Party were raided. On
November 8 came the turn of the two new organisations, at whose
68 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
headquarters tons of seditious and anarchist literature were seized
and a number of prisoners taken. Amongst those arrested on the
charge of criminal anarchy were Isaac E. Ferguson, Charles E.
Ruthenberg and Harry M. Winitsky of the Communist Party and
James Larkin and Benjamin Gitlow of the Communist Labour
Party, who, although convicted and sentenced to long terms of
imprisonment, were soon set at liberty again.
In the following month, December 1919, a number of revolu­
tionaries were deported from America to an unknown port in Russia
in the transport Buford, nicknamed the “ Soviet Ark.” Unfor­
tunately these did not include the most active Communists, but
did include the leading Anarchists, whose influence was now on the
wane, Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman, also Peter Bianki,
the leader of the Anarcho-Syndicalist group, the “ Union of Russian
Workers.” These martyrs to the cause of freedom were received
in Petrograd with tremendous enthusiasm, but although they went
to bless they returned to curse; and the revelations of “ Red
Emma,” who recently visited London, have provided one of the
strongest indictments of the Soviet regime.
As a result of these Government measures at the end of 1919,
the Communist Party in the United States was henceforth obliged
to function illegally or in an underground manner during 1920 and
1921. But neither of the two Communist Parties was destroyed,
and the necessity for uniting the two was urged by the 3rd Inter­
nationale at Moscow. On January 12, 1920, Zinoviev addressed a
letter to the Central Committees of the American Communist
Party and the American Communist Labour Party, pointing out
that the split amongst the Communists had been a heavy blow to
the movement, and that in spite of differences in tactics the two
should unite to seize power and to establish the dictatorship of the
proletariat.
United Communist Party.—Accordingly, in obedience to the
dictates of Moscow, negotiations were at once set on foot by the
two Parties, with a view to achieving unity. These continued
amidst mutual recriminations and denunciations throughout the
summer of 1920, and finally in September a common programme was
agreed upon and issued in the name of the United Communist
Party. A Central Executive Committee was formed with five
members from each Party.
In May 1921 a joint unity convention of the Communist Parties
took place, a reyised and still more extreme programme and con­
stitution was adopted and issued by the C.E.C. This was pub­
lished in the official organ of the Communist Party, The Communist
for July.
American Labor Alliance.—The 3rd Internationale at its Third
Congress of June-July 1921 now ordered the Communist Party of
America to form an open political body, which could operate
legally. In order to carry out this mandate, the Communist Party
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 59
of America organised what was known as “ The American Labor
Alliance,” but as this did not satisfy the 3rd International the
Central Executive of the Party, on the return of its representative,
Max Bedacht, from Moscow, set to work on a scheme which would
serve as a cover to its activities (Congressional Record, “Recogni­
tion of Russia,” pp. 249-54).
Workers’ Party of America.—Accordingly on December 3, 1921,
a call was sent out from the headquarters of the American Labor
Alliance to organise “ The Workers’ Party of America.” The
first convention of the new party took place in New York on
December 23, 1921. The call had been sent out from the A.L.A.
and signed by that body, as also by the Workers’ Council and
various foreign organisations, but not by the Communist Party ; but
the Central Executive of the Workers’Party elected in the follow ing
August was almost exclusivelyicomposed of Communists, including
a number of the same people who formed the Central Executive
of the Communist Party, such as Rose Pastor Stokes, C. E. Ruthen­
berg, Jay Lovestone, A. Bittleman, etc. William Z. Foster, the
revolutionary Syndicalist, was also made a member (Congressional
Record, “ Recognition of Russia,” pp. 267, 352).
The Worker was adopted as the official organ of the Party.
In 1924 the C.E.C. of the Workers’ Party was composed as
follows :
Alexander Bittleman
Earl R. Browder
F. Burman
J. P. Cannon
William F. Dunne
J. L. Engdahl
It also has its Political Bureau :
Foster Browder Cannon
Pepper Lovestone Dunne
Ruthenberg
(Reds in America, p. 15.)
It should be noted that Pepper was the pseudonym adopted by
the Hungarian-Jew, Joseph Pogany, who had been a member of
Bela Kun’s cabinet during the Red Terror in Hungary (Ibid., p. 44).
On August 22, 1922, the whole “ colossal conspiracy against
the United States ” was literally “ unearthed ” by the Michigan
constabulary, who discovered two barrels of incriminating docu­
ments, buried in the ground by the leaders of a secret convention
of the Communist Party in a grove near Bridgman, who, hearing
that a raid was imminent, concealed their papers before taking
flight. From the “ names, records, checks from prominent people
in the U.S.A., instructions from Moscow,” etc., the “ whole
William Z. Foster
Benjamin Gitlow
Ludwig Lore
J. Lovestone
John Pepper
C. E. Ruthenberg
60 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
machinery of the underground organisation ” was laid bare. The
author of Reds in America, from which we quote, goes on to say :
“ I t can be stated w ith authority th a t the W orkers’ party of America
is a branch of this organisation, placed in the field by orders direct
from Moscow and supported by the illegal branches of the Communist
Party. I t is known th a t agents of the Communists are working
secretly, through ‘ legal ’ bodies, in labor circles, in society, in pro­
fessional groups, in the Arm y and N avy, in Congress, in the schools
and colleges of the country, in banks and business concerns, among
the farmers, in the motion picture industry— in fact, in nearly every
walk of life.
“ These agents are not ‘ lowbrows,’ b u t are keen, clever, intelligent,
educated m en and women. They are experts in their several lines.
Their programs, which are now known, show th a t their plans for
inciting the negroes, the farmers, the clerks, the workmen in industry,
members of Congress, employees in Governm ent departm ents every­
where, to violence against the constituted authorities, have been
draw n w ith alm ost uncanny appreciation of the psychology of each
group, w ith facts and figures so m anipulated as to appeal to those
approached, w ith false premises so cleverly drawn as to fool alm ost
anyone.
“ The nam es of persons interested directly or indirectly in this
m ovem ent are astounding. They range from bricklayers to bishops,
and include m any prom inent official and society people. I t m ust
be understood th a t by far the greater num ber of these people do not
know to w hat they are lending the use of their names and influence
or to w hat they are giving their money. They have been approached
to give aid to the W orkers’ Party, or to m any of the relief organisations
which have sprung up disguising Communistic activities, or to the
forward-looking, “ advanced ” schools of political thought. They do
not know th a t their nam es are on w hat are known in the secret circles
of the Communists as *sucker lists,’ comprising the nam es of people
who have given to one or another of the various ‘ causes ’ which are
m anipulated by the Communists and who can, if properly approached,
be induced to give again.”
In spite of this exposi. and the wise policy adopted by the
Government of the U.S.A. in refusing to recognise Soviet Russia,
the Communist movement in that country, though checked, has
never been entirely defeated. The Workers’ Party of America
still continues to exist as an open political party acting as a cover
to Communist activities (Congressional Record for December 19,
1925, p. 3).
Friends of Soviet Russia.—Another Communist organisation
formed in America on August 7, 1921, by the Central Executive
Committee of the Communist Party was the “ Friends of Soviet
Russia,” for the purpose of collecting “ relief funds and supplies
for direct transmission to Russian Soviet authorities,” and also of
presenting the real facts about Soviet Russia to the American
people, with a view to the lifting of the blockade and the resumption
WORLD BOLSHEVISM 61
of trade {Reds in America, p. 98). The organisation of this body
was carried out by Caleb Harrison and Dr. Jacob W. Hartmann,
and the names on the Executive and Advisory Committees included
those of William Z. Foster, Rose Pastor Stokes, Jack Carney, Max
Eastman and other well-known Communists. The official organ
of the society was at first named Soviet Russia, but at the end of
1922 it was changed to the Soviet Russia Pictorial, which is the
organ of the W.I.R. (Workers’ International Relief). In fact, the
“ Friends of Soviet Russia ” seem to be the American branch of the
W.I.R. founded in the same year of 1921 in Berlin (Congressional
Record, “Recognition of Russia,” Part II, p. 391. 1924). An account
of the W.I.R. will be given later.
The rest of the history of Communism in America must be
reserved for the section on the Trade Union movement, with which
it has now become intimately connected.
CHAPTER VII
Leeds Conference.—The first repercussion of the Russian Revolution
in England was the Leeds Conference, which took place on June 3,
1917, mainly under the auspices of the I.L.P. and the B.S.P. with
the object of stopping the War, but also, as far as a number of
delegates were concerned, for the further purpose of bringing about
a revolution in this country.
“ This attem pt to organise a revolution to end the war was supported
by the U.D.C., I.L .P., B.S.P., W omen’s International League, H erald
League (an offshoot of the Daily Herald), the Clyde W orkers’ Committee,
etc. Sinn Feiners also attended the Convention. Among the sup­
porters of the scheme were Tom Mann, A rthur MacManus, W. Gallacher
(Clyde), and Noah A blett and other Syndicalists from South Wales ”
(Morning Post, November 1918).
There were also present 371 delegates from trade union organisa­
tions, though none of the prominent trade union leaders, with the
exception of Robert Smillie (president of the Miners’ Federation)
and Robert Williams (Transport Workers); besides these were
representatives of various Pacifist bodies—the No Conscription
Fellowship, Fellowship of Reconciliation, Council for Civil Liberties
—and a number of aliens, Czeks and East-End Jews, as also a body
calling itself the “ Foreign Jews’ Protection Committee.”
Ramsay Macdonald moved the first resolution congratulating
the people of Russia on the success of their revolution; this was
seconded by Mrs. D. B. Montefiore, of the B.S.P. and later of the
Communist Party.
The second resolution, drafted and moved by Philip Snowden,
pledged the Conference to work in agreement with the international
democracies for peace without annexations and indemnities. But
the most important resolution was the fourth, moved by W. C.
Anderson, M.P., and seconded by Robert Williams, which pro­
claimed the setting up of Councils of Workmen’s and Soldiers’
Delegates in imitation of the Russian Soviet of Soldiers and Workers
then existing under the Kerensky regime. Amongst the most
active supporters of the movement were Ramsay Macdonald, the
Snowdens and C. G. Ammon, all I.L.P.; Charles Roden Buxton,
Pethick Lawrence and Bertrand Russell, U.D.C.; E. C. Fairchild
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN
62
and Mrs. Dora Montefiore, B.S.P.; and Sylvia Pankhurst of the
Workers’ Socialist Federation.
According to the Evening Standard the real inspirer of the
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Council was the renegade Frenchman, E. D.
Morel, formerly Edmond Morel-de-Ville, who was imprisoned a few
months later for contravening the Defence of the Realm Regula­
tions. It is amusing, in the light of the indulgence shown
towards the leaders of the recent Socialist Government, to note
what was once said about them when patriotism was still the
fashion in this country :
“ The Committee of the W orkers’ and Soldiers’ Council is an out­
come of the ‘ Morel ’ m ovement, which is responsible, directly or
indirectly, through the parent body, the U.D.C., for the whole of the
Pacifist organisations and propaganda through which ‘ Morel ’ is
attem pting, by a variety of insidious appeals, to weaken the war
resolutions of the people and fom ent industrial troubles in order to
cripple our m ilitary efforts. This network of organisation has been
woven by the same m aster hand. Messrs. Philip Snowden, Ram say
Macdonald, Ponsonby, Trevelyan are, consciously or unconsciously,
all creatures of ‘ Morel,’ and quite insignificant w ithout him. This
pro-German exploits their follies and their prejudices in the same
way th a t he uses the cowards and the shirkers and the Quakers and
the Syndicalists and the elements of anarchy wherever they are to
be found. H e has been working cunningly and assiduously for m any
m onths to save Prussia from defeat, and he has used any instrum ent
th a t came to his hand. I shall continue, therefore, to call the W orkers’
and Soldiers’ Council a product of the 1Morel ’ movem ent, whose
founder should long ago have been deprived of his naturalisation, by
Act of Parliam ent if necessary, and expelled the country as an undesir­
able alien” (Evening Standard, July 31, 1917).
It was in May of this same year, 1917, that Ramsay Macdonald
applied for a passport to go to Russia in order to consult with the
Workmen’s and Soldiers’Soviets, but in view of his Pacifist activi­
ties during the war the National Seamen and Firemen’s Union
under Havelock Wilson refused to carry him.
All this belongs, however, to the pre-Bolshevik era, since the
beginning of which the Right Wing leaders of the I.L.P. referred to
above have periodically professed abhorrence of the Soviet Govern­
ment, though as late as October 14, 1922, Ramsay Macdonald
wrote in Forward :
“ I have been an unswerving hopeful regarding the Moscow Govern­
m ent. . . . We can now take the Moscow Soviet Communist Revolu­
tionary Government under our wing, and clothe it in the furs of apology
to shield it from the blasts of criticism.”
“ Hands off Russia ” Committee.—One of the first organisations to
proclaimopenlyits adherence to Bolshevik Russiawas the “Hands off
Russia ” Committee, formed at the beginning of 1919 on the initia­
tive of James Crossley, one of the founders of the B.S.P. in Man­
chester, with Lenin as President and Trotsky as Vice-President
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN 63
64 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
(evidenced W. F. Watson,member of “ Handsoff Russia” Committee
in libel action against the Duke of Northumberland, Daily Mail,
November 17, 1921). In all parts of the country large meetings
were held under the direction of Colonel L’Estrange Malone, M.P.,
and Professor W. T. Goode, and on February 8, 1919, a monster
demonstration took place in the Albert Hall, London. Tom Mann
was in the chair, and speecheswere made by Colonel Malone, Robert
Williams and also by Israel Zangwill, who declared that “ Bol­
shevism, far from being the antithesis to Christianity, was merely
an applied form of it.” It was also on this occasion that Zangwill
observed : “ The British Government is only Bolshevism in embryo
and Bolshevism is only Socialism in a hurry, Socialism while you
won’t wait” (report of speech published by The Workers’ Socialist
Federation, p. 7).
On May 21,1920, the “ Hands off Russia ” Committee published
a big advertisement in the Daily Herald, advocating a twenty-four
hours’ General Strike to coerce the Government to let Russia alone,
and not help Poland. The signatories to this appeal were as follows :
Chas. G. Ammon, L.C.C., L.P., I.L.P., 1917 Club.
John Bromley, Sec., Locomotive Engineers, L.P.
Isaac Brassington, Sec., N.U.R.
Mrs. M. Bamber, Sec., Warehouse Workers.
A. G. Cameron, Sec., Amalgamated Society Carpenters, L.P., I.L.P.
Dr. R. Dunstan, Labour candidate, I.L.P.
R. J. Davies, Union Co-operative Employees, I.L.P.
W. T. Goode, Manchester Guardian.
William Gallacher, Clyde worker.
Alec Gossip, Sec., Furnishing Trades.
Harold Grenfell, Naval Attach^, Russian Embassy (1912-17).
Jack Jones, M.P., S.D.F.
David Kirkwood, Clyde worker, I.L.P.
George Lansbury (Daily Herald), I.L.P.
Neil Maclean, M.P., I.L.P.
Tom Mann, Sec. A.E.U., I.L.P.
A. E. Mander, National Union Ex-Service Men.
Cecil L’Estrange Malone, M.P.
Tom Myers, M.P., L.P., I.L.P.
J. E. Mills, M.P., A.E.U.
George Peet, National Sec., Ship Stewards.
Robert Smillie, Pres., Miners’ Federation.
Ben Spoor, M.P., L.P., U.D.C., 1917 Club.
Fred Shaw, A.S.E.
Josiah Wedgwood, M.P., I.L.P., 1917 Club.
James Winston, S. Wales Miners’ Federation.
Further meetings of the “ Hands off Russia ” Committee were
organised by John Maclean, B.S.P., who described himself as
“ Bolshevik Consul ” in Glasgow (The Call, January 1919), and who
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN 65
had been imprisoned in May 1918 for offences under the Defence of
the Realm Regulations, and W. McLaine, also B.S.P. and member
of the Executive Committee of the 3rdInternationale; A MacManus,
S.L.P., F. Willis, G. Ebury and others.
The H.O.R. Committee has now become the Anglo-Russian
Parliamentary Committee advocating relations with Russia. The
members include A. A. Purcell, J. Bromley, A. Gossip, R. Williams,
W. P. Coates, etc.
At the same time that the “ Hands off Russia ” campaign was
started in 1919, a number of Workmen’s Soviet Committees were
formed, with headquarters in London, under W. F. Watson of the
“ Hands off Russia” Committee, A. MacManus, John Maclean and
Tom Anderson, I.L.P. (founder of the Glasgow Socialist Sunday
Schools in 1894, and who had just started his Proletarian Sunday
Schools in that city).
These operated principally on the Clyde, the centre of John
Maclean’s activities, where he had been indicted for saying in
speeches from January to April 1918 that “ a revolution should be
created,” that “ the Clyde had helped to win the Russian Revolu­
tion,” that “ the present House of Commons should be superseded
by a Soviet, and he did not care whether they met in the usual
place or in Buckingham Palace,” and that “ he was prepared to
run any risk if he thought he could bring about a revolution in
Glasgow” (pamphlet, Condemned from the Dock, published by the
Clyde Workers’ Propaganda Defence Committee, 1918). “ With a
determined revolutionary minority,” he declared, in 1919, “ we shall
be able to take control of the country and the means of produc­
tion at once, and hold them tight through disciplined production
under the Workshop Committees and the District and National
Councils. Through the Co-operative Movement we shall be able
to control the full distribution of the necessaries of life and so win
the masses over to Socialism.”
This was a clear intimation of the part it was intended that
the Co-operatives should play in the scheme of starving the non­
revolutionary portion of the community.
It is significant to notice that all the individuals and groups who
at this date proclaimed themselves in sympathy with Bolshevism
were those who had most strongly opposed resistance to German
Imperialism during the war. In view of the fact that it was the
German General Staff which, on the admission of Ludendorff and
Hoffman, had sent Lenin to Russia in the sealed train, the hand of
Germany, not of Socialist but Imperial Germany, is clearly seen
behind the earliest Bolshevik agitation in this country. This
being the case, it was natural that the B.S.P., being the section
of the S.D.P. which had split off from the rest on the issue
of pro-Germanism, should be the first Socialist body in this
country to ally itself with Moscow. At a Conference of the
Party in October 1919 it was decided by a vote of 98 branches
66 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
to 4 to join up with the 3rd Internationale, and W. McLaine
and Tom Quelch were then placed on the Executive Committee
in Moscow.
Other British parties which by 1920 were affiliated to the
Komintem were the S.L.P., the South Wales Socialist Society, the
National Workers’ Committee Organisation and the Workers’
Socialist Federation.
Workers’ Socialist Federation.—The last named had begun its
career before the War, under the leadership of Sylvia Pankhurst,
as the Women’s Suffrage Federation ; it then became the Workers’
Suffrage Federation, and finally the Workers’ Socialist Federation,
with the Workers’ Dreadnought as its organ.
Sylvia Pankhurst, whom Lenin at first regarded as his principal
lieutenant in this country, was then ordered by him to form a Com­
munist Party in Great Britain, as the British Section of the 3rd
Internationale, and was said to have been promised £3,522 by him
for the purpose. (Morning Post, November 3, 1920.)
First British Communist Party.—The plan was quite openly
announced in the Daily Herald of March 20,1920,where sympathisers
with the “ definite formation of a Revolutionary Communist Party,
affiliated to the 3rd Internationale,” were invited to communicate
with an obscure individual at Ashford Junction. The proposal
met with no interference from the authorities. Accordingly, on
Saturday, June 19, 1920, the first British Communist Party was
formed at a meeting which took place at the International Socialist
Club, 28 East Road, City Road, London. This Club was a re­
suscitation of the old Communist Club in Charlotte Street, Soho,
which had been closed at the end of 1919, and the leading spirit
was described as a “ Jewess of Russian extraction ” whose name
was not given in the press (Evening News for January 12, 1920).
At the Conference in question the delegates were drawn from
various small Communist societies, including Sylvia Pankhurst’s
own Party, the Workers’ Socialist Federation. The Conference
then drew up the following declaration :
“ We, revolutionary and Communist delegates and individuals,
pledge ourselves to the Third International, the dictatorship of the
proletariat, the Soviet System, non-affiliation to the Labour P arty and
to abstention from Parliam entary action ; and decide not to take
p art in the A ugust 1st unity conference or in the unity negotiations
concerned with it.”
The C.P.G.B.—In abjuring parliamentary action this first
Communist Party had, however, failed to carry out Lenin’s policy
of “ boring from within.” Lenin, therefore, now gave his support
to the other group calling itself “ The Joint Provisional Committee
for the Communist Party of Great Britain,” led by A. MacManus,
which had convoked the conference in question with a view to
forming a United British Communist Party. In a letter dated
July 10, 1920, Lenin wrote as follows :
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN 67
“ I have received the letter of the Joint Provisional Committee for
the Communist P arty of B ritain dated June 20, and hasten to answer
in reply to their request, th a t I entirely sym pathise w ith the plan they
have developed for the im m ediate organisation of a single Communist
P arty in England. I consider th a t the tactics of Comrade Sylvia
Pankhurst and of the W orkers’ Socialist Federation are m istaken
because of their refusal to join in a unification of the British Socialist
Party, the Socialist Labour P arty, and other organisations into one
Communist Party. In particular I am personally in favour of partici­
pation in parliam ent and also in favour of adherence to the labor
party under the condition of reserving complete freedom and inde­
pendent com munist action ; and I shall defend these tactics a t the
Second Congress of the Third International on July 15th in Moscow.
I consider as m ost desirable the immediate organisation of one Com­
m unist P arty on the basis of all these decisions of the Third International
and also the bringing of th a t party into the closest touch with the
Industrial W orkers of the World and the shop stewards committee,
in order to unite completely w ith them in the nearest future ” (Lusk
Report, II. 1605, and Morning Post, August 2, 1920).
The result of these instructions was the foundation of the
present Communist Party of Great Britain on August 1, 1920, at
a Conference held in the Cannon Street Hotel, London. About
150 delegates were present, mainly from the British Socialist Party
and the Socialist Labour Party of Glasgow, others represented
smaller Left Wing Socialist groups. Arthur MacManus (S.L.P.)
presided and was elected chairman of the Executive Committee
now formed, consisting of the following : W. Paul, Tom Bell,
A. A. Watts, F. Willis, J. F. Hodgson, W. Hewlett, Fred Shaw,
R. Stewart, Mrs. Dora B. Montefiore, Col. L’Estrange Malone,
G. Deer, and William Mellor. A. A. Purcell, who had just returned
from Russia, and Robert Williams were amongst the delegates
who spoke. The general secretary of the B.S.P., Albert Inkpin,
became the secretary of the C.P.G.B. (Times and Daily Herald of
August 2, 1920).
Although a section of the S.L.P. now entered the C.P.G.B., the
S. L.P. has continued up to the present time as a separate body, with
its organ The Socialist. Much the same thing took place in the
I.L.P., which contained a considerable Communist element. The
close relations maintained between this section of the Party and the
3rd Internationale were shown in the Report of the Second Congress
of the Communist Internationale, published in Petrograd in 1921,
where an article appeared signed, “ In the name of the Left Wing
of the I.L.P. : Helen Crawfurd, secretary.” The writer here describes
the efforts of the Left Wing to swing the I.L.P. over to Communism,
particularly in the North of England, Scotland and Wales—Merthyr
Tydvil being indicated as the centre of the movement—and ends
with the assurance that should these efforts prove unsuccessful, at
any rate a section of the Party will join up with the Communists.
Mrs. Crawfurd is now a member of the C.P.G.B., as are also certain
08 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
other members of the I.L.P., whilst on the other hand some of the
most violent Communists have remained in the I.L.P., and have
not joined up with the Communist Party.
The B.S.P. became merged with the C.P.G.B. at the time of the
latter’s formation, and ceased to exist altogether, whilst its
organ The Gall was replaced by the organ of the new Party,
The Communist.
Second S.D.F.—At the same time the National Socialist Party,
led by Hyndman, which had formed the Right Wing of the British
Socialist Party when the Left Wing split off from it in 1916, resumed
the old name of the Social Democratic Federation, which it bears
to-day. Justice continued to be its organ until 1925, when it was
changed from a weekly to a monthly, with the new name The
Social Democrat. Since the death of H. M. Hyndman in 1921 the
S.D.F. has had no leader of outstanding personality. Its Executive
Committee now includes the following :
Tom Kennedy, M.P. (General Secretary), H. W. Lee, Will
Thome, M.P., Jack Jones, M.P., F. Montague, M.P., W. G. Cluse,
M.P. The late Dan Irving was also a member.
The offices of the S.D.F. have just been moved to the Hyndman
Club and Institute, 54 Colebroke Row, Islington.
The S.D.F. has always continued to advocate Marxian Socialism
as interpreted by Hyndman in the past, but it has consistently
opposed Bolshevism as a violation of social democratic principles,
and denounced the form of Pacifism which tends to the advantage
of Germany. The late Adolphe Smith was one of its most en­
lightened and patriotic members, who remained to the end of his
life a true friend of France and enemy of German militarism.
By the end of 1920 the Communist movement in Great Britain
had passed entirely out of the hands of Sylvia Pankhurst into those
of the C.P.G.B. This was owing, not only to Lenin’s displeasure,
but to Sylvia’s arrest in October of that year by the Government
of this country on the charge of publishing matter calculated to
cause disaffection in the Army and Navy. At the trial she was
found not only to be working directly with Lenin, Zinoviev and an
East-End Jew named Rosenberg, who occupied a high position in
the Foreign Office at Moscow, but also to be in touch with Louis
Fraina, international secretary of the Communist Party of America,
through a Russian-Jew, Jacob Nosowitsky, who acted as courier
between the United States and this country, where, according to
his own account given recently in the Hearst Press (Chicago Herald,
October 11, 1925), he was also in the employment of Scotland Yard.
Letters were produced addressed by Sylvia Pankhurst to Lenin and
Zinoviev showing how the distress of the unemployed was being
exploited by the revolutionaries and complaining of the failure of the
Communist Party to “ rise to the occasion.” One passage ran: “ The
Communist Parties are not large enough or intelligent enough to
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN 69
make capital out of the situation. We are talking of a Communist
Council of action. Colonel Malone, with whom I have juBt been
speaking and who is a member of the Executive of the Communist
Party, tells me his Executive does not wish to join with us or other
parties, but to absorb us” (Morning Post, November 3,1920.)
This rivalry led up finally to the excommunication of Comrade
Sylvia Pankhurst by the C.P.G.B. after her release from prison,
and the demand by this body that the Workers’Dreadnought should
be handed over to them. This was not acceded to, and Sylvia
retained possession of her organ. The liberty of speech enjoyed
under Communism was thus described by Sylvia Pankhurst in this
organ :
“ Dressed in a little brief authority this Executive, which, meeting
only fortnightly, is necessarily controlled by the paid officials who
are always on the spot, was full of zeal to serve the Communist P arty
by controlling me. . . . The Comrades intended to enforce discipline
in its m ost stultifying aspect. Comrade MacManus, as Chairman,
informed me th a t they would not perm it any member of the party
to write or publish a book or pam phlet w ithout the sanction of the
Executive. Those who m ay differ from the Executive on any point
of principle, policy or tactics, or even those whose m ethod of dealing
with agreed theory is not approved or appreciated by the Executive,
are therefore to be gagged.” (Morning Post, Sept. 19, 1921.)
Workers’ Communist Movement.—Repudiated both by Lenin
and the C.P.G.B., Sylvia Pankhurst now joined the 4th Inter­
nationale, started in this year, 1921, in Berlin under A. Bogdanov and
claiming to be more advanced than Moscow. At the same time she
continued to run her group, which in 1923 changed its name to the
Workers’ Communist Movement affiliated to the 4th Internationale
(see account of this in Daily Telegraph, April 28, 1923).
Unemployed Workers’ Organisation.—At about the same date
she formed the “ Unemployed Workers’ Organisation,” in which
she was associated with a Miss Nora Smythe.
A.P.C.F.—These organisations have now ceased to exist and
Sylvia Pankhurst has retired from the political arena, but another
body, somewhat akin to hers, is still a going concern, namely, the
Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation, formed by Guy
Aldred in 1921. This was the outcome of the Glasgow Anarchist
Group, described in an earlier chapter of this book, which had taken
over its present premises at 13 Burnbank Gardens, Glasgow, in
May 1917. In May 1920 it resumed its old name of the Glasgow
Communist Group, founded Bakunin House, and then, in 1921,
became the A.P.C.F. divided into Federated Groups.
In view of this use of the name of Bakunin, who, at the
Conference at Berne in 1869, had declared that he “ abominated
Communism,” it is difficult to understand why Guy Aldred and his
followers should call themselves Communists and not Anarchists.
This may be attributed to expediency—owing to the present boom
70 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
in Communism and slump in Anarchism—or perhaps to a wish to
disassociate themselves from the Kropotkine Anarchists of the
Freedom Group, consisting of George Barrett, Sir Walter Strickland
(a Cambridge don), Will J. Owen, John Wakeman and Dr. M.
Zalkind, editor of the London Yiddish paper Der Arbeiter Freind.
For some inexplicable reason the A.P.C.F. has never been able to
agree with this group.
The Communist Federation (A.P.C.F.), whilst insignificant in
comparison with the Communist Party (C.P.G.B.), continues to
attract a certain amount of attention—mainly amongst undesirable
aliens—owing to Guy Aldred’s powers of soap-box oratory.
It should be noted that although the Communist Federation
supports the seditious activities of the Communist Party, the two
bodies are violently opposed, indeed the Commune, the official
paper of the former, styling itself until lately “ the organ of his
Majesty’s Communist Opposition,” and now “ an Organ of the
Coming Social Revolution,” declares it to be the duty of every true
Communist to disassociate himself from the Communist Party.
This hostility apparently arises from the fact that the Communist
Federation is anti-parliamentarian and disapproves of the C.P.G.B.
for taking part in politics, and also for its subservience to the Bol­
sheviks of Russia. A number of useful truths are frequently to be
found in the Commune, this for example in the issue of November
1925 :
“ I t is an adm itted fact th at the activities of the Communist P arty
are n o t the result of a spontaneous proletarian m ovem ent in this
country, b u t the dictation of a select com m ittee possessing financial
power in Moscow.”
And the writer (Guy Aldred himself) goes on to ask how the
Communists recently arrested can complain of their treatment,
whilst remaining the “ bribed and hired upholders ” of the Bol­
shevik regime, with its Red Army and Code of Criminal Laws.
“ How can that be wrong in London which is right in Moscow ? ”
The Communist Federation has therefore never allied itself
with the 3rd Internationale, and since 1920 has appeared to oppose
it. In the words of Guy Aldred, it “ objects to a few high priests
in Moscow, mostly hypocrites, dictating to hirelings here.” At the
same time, the Commune has violently denounced the Anarchist
Jewess, Emma Goldman, for her unfavourable report on Russia.
“ Em m a Goldman continues in her r61e of revolutionary scab.
H er London adm irers consist of Zionists who have no taste for Palestine
and Jewish m aster tailors who prefer sweating in London to working
in Moscow or Leningrad ” (April 1925).
The Communist Federation is in reality a purely destructive
association, to which it would be absurd to attribute any consistent
policy. Guy Aldred’s oratory consists mainly in a series of diatribes
against the British Empire and all forms of religion. Hatred of
Christianity is its most distinguishing feature.
The Hyde Park Socialist Club.—Connected with the Communist
Federation is the “ Hyde Park Socialist Club,” established in Sep­
tember 1925, an association which holds meetings and gives
entertainments.
Such are the Communist parties at present in this country.
Of the three existing in 1923—the C.P.G.B., the A.P.C.F. and the
C.W.P.—only the first two remain, and of these the C.P.G.B., being
the body specially chosen and financed to carry out the dictates of
Moscow, is by far the more important. Before describing its further
activities it will be necessary in the next two chapters to study
the development of the Trade Union movement from 1921 onwards.
Bolshevism in Ireland
It is difficult here to follow the course of Bolshevism in Ireland,
owing to its connection with both secret and national movements,
which do not enter into the scope of this book. Thus Sinn Fein,
which in 1903 took over the work of the old Irish Nationalist move­
ment, whilst forming an open revolutionary movement, cannot be
classed as a part of the Socialist organisation, although no doubt
it maintained relations with the great secret society of Ireland, the
“ Irish Republican Brotherhood,” which in its turn co-operated
with the agents of world revolution in America.
Communist Party of Ireland.—The Communist Party of Ireland,
into which the former Socialist Party was transformed in 1919 after
the creation of the 3rd Internationale, was a small and not very
important organisation numbering only about 1,000 people. The
national chairman was Roderick Conolly, son of James Conolly,
founder of the Irish Socialist Republican Party, which had preceded
the Socialist Party of Ireland, and the chairman of the Dublin
branch, Liam O’Flaherty. Jim Larkin, after his release from
imprisonment in the United States, brought into it fresh inspiration
from the inner circles of the Moscow and American organisations,
in both of which he played an important role.
The organ of the C.P.I. was The Workers’ Republic.
Irish Workers’ League—Irish Workers’ Union.—In 1923 the
Communist Party came to an end and the Irish Workers’ League
was formed by James and Peter Larkin. This in 1924 became the
Irish Workers’ Union.
Irish Transport Workers’ Union.—Meanwhile the Irish Transport
Workers’ Union, under James Larkin and Conolly, took a leading
part in the “ red ” movement.
Irish Communist Brotherhood.—The real force of the Inter­
national Socialist movement, as opposed to the National Catholic
movement, was supplied not so much by Russia as by the Communist
Pari*' of America, which maintained close relations with the Irish
BOLSHEVISM IN GREAT BRITAIN 71
72 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Republican Brotherhood and the still more secret Irish Communist
Brotherhood, founded in 1920 and controlled by a Supreme Council
of Six. The members of these two Brotherhoods were in constant
communication with both Germany and America, particularly the
latter, where the dan-na-Gael served as a cover to the I.R.B.,
whilst the American Association for the Recognition of the Irish
Republic formed the open organisation of the Clan-na-Gael. All
this being a matter of secret circles, of which the members’ names
cannot be given as in the case of the open organisations dealt with
here, we would refer readers interested in the subject to the series
of articles entitled “ The Realities of Revolution,” which appeared in
the Patriot from March 15 to June 14, 1923, where the amazing plot
is at least partially revealed.
CHAPTER VIII
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM
It will have been noticed by every attentive student of the world
revolutionary movement that during 1921 and 1922 a lull occurred
and for a time it seemed as if Bolshevism might be a spent force.
Communism, in the form of State Socialism administered by an
autocratic bureaucracy as in Moscow, had failed to attract the
working-men. Lenin’s instructions concerning the “ higher dis­
cipline of the toilers,” the institution of “ a merciless dictatorship,”
“ the absolute submission of the masses to the single will of those
who direct the labour process ” (The Soviets at Work, pp. 25, 35, 40.
English translation, published by the Socialist Information and
Research Bureau) were hardly calculated to inspire enthusiasm. The
slogans that have a meaning for the “ revolutionary proletariat ” are
those that convey a concrete idea, such as physical force, material
gain or destruction, which Syndicalism and its parent Anarchy have
always known how to frame. “ The Mines for the Miners ” was
naturally amorealluring crythan ‘‘the Mines for the State.’’ Schemes
of nationalisation when clearly expounded left the great majority
of the workers cold.
The great triumph of the Bolsheviks lay, then, in their success
in capturing the revolutionary portion of the Trade Union movement
by persuading it that Syndicalism was not incompatible with
Communism. Lenin’s initial error had been to deny this com­
patibility ; quite frankly he had declared that the workers could
not run industry and that it was no part of the Bolshevik scheme
to allow them to attempt it (see, for example, The Chief Task of
our Times, by Lenin, p. 12.)
The I.W.W.—Zinoviev calculated more shrewdly; he knew that
the only hope for Bolshevism lay in winning over the Syndicalists.
His famous letter to the I.W.W. of America in January 1920 was
a triumph of sophistry, and must be quoted at some length in
order to show the tactics adopted by the Bolsheviks for enlisting
Revolutionary Trade Unionism in their support.
Up to 1919 the Trade Union movement had shown officially
little sympathy with Bolshevism. The International Federation
of Trade Unions, or “ Amsterdam Internationale,” had for its presi­
dent the wise Trade Union leader W. A. Appleton, and had not as
yet developed a Left Wing.
The British Trades Union Congress had appeared to concern
U
74 THE SOCIALIST NETW ORK
itself mainly with industrial questions, and it was not until 1919
that it entered into a scheme for co-ordination with the Labour
Party. A National Joint Council was finally arranged in 1921.
The Confederation Gen<5rale du Travail of France was still
largely controlled by the Reformist section. In America even the
revolutionary I.W.W. had held aloof from Bolshevism. Its official
organ, the One Big Union Monthly, had asked : “ Why should we
follow Bolshevism ? ” adding that all the Bolshevik Revolution
had done was “ to give the Russian people the vote.”
It was in answer to this that Zinoviev, as President of the
I.K.K.I., wrote his appeal. Replying to the objection here quoted,
he observed :
“ This is, of course, untrue. The Bolshevik Revolution has taken
the factories, mills, mines, land and financial institutions out of the
hands of the capitalists and transferred them to the W h o l e W o r k in g
C l a s s .”
But he went on to explain th a t:
“ The private property of the capitalist class, in order to become
the S o c ia l property of the workers, cannot be turned over to individuals
or groups of individuals. I t m ust become the property of all in
common, and a centralised authority is necessary to accomplish this
change. The industries, too, which supply the needs of all the people,
are not the concern only of the workers in each industry, b u t of All
i n C o m m o n , and m ust be adm inistered for the benefit of all.”
This was of course a direct repudiation of Syndicalist theory,
which advocates the control of each industry by the workers engaged
therein. Moreover, what was the “ centralised authority ” referred
to but the State which Syndicalists set out to destroy ?
Zinoviev clearly recognised these differences of opinion, and set
out to explain them away one by one.
Firstly. The question of the State.
“ ‘Many members of the I.W .W .’ . . are against ‘the State in general.’
They propose to overthrow the capitalist State and to establish in its
place im m ediately the Industrial Commonwealth. . . We, Com­
m unists, also w ant to abolish the State. The State can only exist so
long as there is class struggle. The function of the Proletarian
dictatorship is to abolish the capitalist class as a class ; in fact, to do
away w ith all class divisions of every kind. And when this condition
is reached then the P r o l e t a r ia n D ic t a t o r s h ip , t h e S t a t e , a u t o ­
m a t i c a l l y D is a p p e a r s — to make way for an industrial adm inistrative
body which will be something like the General Executive Board of
the I.W .W .”
We note, however, that to-day, seven years after these words
were written, the State shows no signs of disappearing in Russia, but
on the contrary is stronger than ever, as shown by the recent pub­
lication of its criminal code.
Secondly. Zinoviev examines the weapon of Syndicalism—
the General Strike. After remarking that the Communists and the
I.W.W. are in accord with regard to the necessity of attacking the
Capitalist State by direct action he says :
“ The I.W .W . proposes to attain this end by the General Strike*
The Communists go further. H istory indicates clearly th a t the
General Strike is not enough. The capitalists have arms. . . . More­
over, the capitalists possess stores of food, which enable them to hold
out longer than the workers, always on the verge of actual want. The
Communists also advocate the General Strike, b u t they add th a t it
m ust turn into A r m e d I n s u r r e c t io n . B oth the General Strike and
the insurrection are forms of P o l i t ic a l A c t io n . ”
Thirdly. Zinoviev discusses the question of parliamentarianism.
“ Many members of the I.W.W. are bitterly opposed to making
any use of legislations and other Government institutions for
purposes of propaganda.” But he goes on to show the utility of
political campaigns as providing “ an opportunity for revolutionists
to speak to the working-class . . . to show the futility of reforms
. . . and to point out why the entire capitalist system must be
overthrown.”
Having thus disposed to his own satisfaction of all the differences
dividing the I.W.W. from the Bolsheviks, Zinoviev concludes by
appealing to it and also to the W.I.I.U. (Workers’ International
Industrial Union), the insurgent Unions in the A.F. of L., and the
One Big Union group, to come to an agreement with the American
Communists for “ common revolutionary action.” The letter ends
with the words : “ The Communist International holds out to the
I.W.W. the hand of brotherhood.”
The hand was grasped—by a section of the organisation. The
March issue of its organ, the One Big Union Monthly, published an
article in which the following passage appeared :
“ The I.W .W . contains the identical potentialities of the Soviet. . . .
The real clash of power in this country is between the I.W .W . and
the A.F. of L. . . . The I.W .W . is the American Soviet.”
Precisely a year before Zinoviev’s letter was written, the invi­
tation to the 1st Congress of the 3rd Internationale in March had
been sent out from Moscow, and the I.W.W.s of America, Great
Britain and Australia were requested to send representatives.
In June the weekly organ of the I.W.W., New Solidarity,
announced :
“ The I.W .W . has recognised the Communist International by
deciding to send a representative to their congress. Now Left Wingers,
are you true in your preachings ? Are you Bolshevik ? . . . Do you
believe in uniting all the energies of the class-conscious proletariat ? If you
do there is b u t one course of aotion left. T hat is to join the I.W .W .
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM 75
76 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The I.W .W . in America has stood for the same principles th a t the
Bolsheviks have— the class struggle, no compromise, the proletarian
dictatorship and the final act of overthrowing capitalism. Are you
consistent ? Prove it.”
But the I.W.W. sympathisers with the Bolshevik regime had
spoken without the assent of all their comrades. The I.W.W. as a
whole declined to ally itself either with the Komintern or with the
Communist Party of America, although certain leaders of factions,
such as the old Syndicalist William D. Haywood, went over to the
Communists. From 1919 to 1923 persistent efforts were made by
the 3rd Internationale to bring the I.W.W. into line ; these efforts
only met with partial success (Congressional Record, “ Recognition
of Russia,” Part II, p. 422. 1924).
As a result of this refractory attitude, the Communists of America
set out to undermine the I.W.W. by capturing the Trade Union
movement through other bodies working in co-operation with
Moscow. In this campaign a prominent part was played by William
Z. Foster, I.W.W., and leader of the Left Wing of the A.F. of L., who
in that organisation met with persistent opposition from the leader
of the Right Wing, Samuel Gompers, a strong opponent of the
Bolshevik regime.
The T.U.E.L.—Unable to swing the A.F. of L. sufficiently to the
Left, William Z. Foster in April 1920 founded a new group called
the Trade Union Educational League, with the object of carrying
out in industrial circles the same propaganda that the Workers’
Party of America was carrying out in the field of politics (Reds in
America, p. 13). That the T.U.E.L. was actually a branch of the
Communist Party was shown in a report that came to light in the
Bridgman raid of 1922 ( Ibid., p. 131).
But, as will be shown in the following chapter, a new power had
now arisen, which was to form the rallying centre for revolutionary
Trade Unionism, under the banner of Moscow, and relegate the
I.W.W. to the background.
Meanwhile, in England intensive propaganda was being carried
on in the trade unions by the agents of Moscow, and gradually the
dynamic force of the social revolution was passing from the hands
of the theoretical Socialists into those of the organisers and financiers
of industrial troubles. The skilful manner in which these ventrilo­
quists projected their voices through the mouth of “ Labour ”
was shown by Bernard Shaw of the Labour Research Department
after the railway strike that took place in October 1919. On the
principle of “ If you don’t want to be believed speak the truth,”
Shaw said at a Labour meeting on December 2 :
“ The Labour Research D epartm ent became the Publicity D epart­
m ent of the railway strike, and I knew pretty well how the thing
had to be carried on. P u t your m em ory back a little. The railway
strike took place on a Friday. On the Saturday the whole country
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM 77
was cursing the railwaymen. Your trains were all stopped. You
were all convinced by your newspapers th a t here were the railwaymen,
who had m ade a com bination practically to extort enormous wages
from the com m unity a t the expense of the general com munity. We
set to work, and by the following W ednesday the country had become
convinced th a t the Government had been engaged in a deliberate
attem pt to reduce the wages of the railwaymen.” (M orning Post,
Dec. 3,. 1919.)
Bernard Shaw’s real sentiments with regard to strikes were
thus callously set forth later on in the Labour Monthly for October
1921:
“ A Socialist State would not tolerate such an attack on the com­
m unity as a strike for a moment. If a Trade Union attem pted such
a thing, the old capitalist law against Trade Unions as conspiracies
would be re-enacted within twenty-four hours and p u t ruthlessly into
execution. Such a m onstrosity as the recent coal strike, during
which the coal-miners spent all their savings in dam aging their neigh­
bours and wrecking the national industries, would be impossible
under Socialism. I t was miserably defeated, as it deserved to be.”
The Co-operative Societies.—The railway strike of 1919 demon­
strated the manner in which the advocates of the General Strike
had now perfected their system. The old difficulty of how the
strikers were to live during a national hold-up was believed to have
been got over by a plan of joint action arranged between the Trades
Union Congress Parliamentary Committee and the Central Board
of the Co-operative Union. The way in which the community
was to be starved out whilst the strikers thrived was thus implied
by Fred Bramley, assistant secretary of the aforesaid T.U.C.
Parliamentary Committee :
“ We . . . set out to secure th a t if the railway dispute was extended
(if it developed into a general strike) we should avoid, if possible, the
withdrawal of m en from co-operative em ployment in order th a t the
co-operative m ovem ent could be used as a food-distributing agency on
behalf of the workers.
“ In o th er w ords, w e w er e not going to cut o ff ou r ow n
su ppl ie s.” (Evening Standard, Oct. 17, 1919.)
Thus the co-operative societies, the sanest and most progressive
movement that “ Labour ” had produced in this country, had now
become an important part of the revolutionary machine. No
wonder that Lenin, desiring above all the downfall of Great Britain,
boasted that 1920 would realise his hopes.
Council of Action.—On August 9 of that year the Executive
of the Labour Party, the Parliamentary Committee of the T.U.C.
and the Parliamentary Labour Party met in an emergency confer­
ence at the House of Commons on the pretext that the Government
was contemplating taking up arms against Soviet Russia for the
defence of Poland. It was then decided to form a “ Council of
78 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Action ” for the purpose of organising the workers to “ down
tools ” in such an eventuality. This Council was formed of members
of the three bodies participating, as follows :
P.L.P. :
W. Adamson, M.P. (elected Chairman)
J. R. Clynes, M.P.
Harry Gosling
A. Swales
Colonel Wedgwood, M.P.,T.U.C.
Executive of L.P. :
A. G. Cameron
C. T. Cramp
Frank Hodges
A. A. Purcell
R. B. Walker
Margaret Bondfield
Robert Williams
J. Bromley
Local Councils of Action were set up all over the country.
As in 1848 in France Poland, then the martyr country of the
revolutionary Socialists but now the object of their anathemas,
served merely as a pretext for rallying the forces of revolution, and
it was obvious that “ the machinery thus erected would be available
for a general strike, with other objects in view ” (Morning Post,
September 21, 1920). As shown by a document published in this
issue of the Morning Post, an essential point in the programme was
again : “ The capture by Labour of the local Co-operative Society
so as to ensure the distribution of food to the strikers and their
families.” To this plan of campaign the so-called moderate Labour
leaders on the Council lent their support.
What was not generally known at the time was that the real
inspirer of the Council of Action was Kamenev, alias Rosenfeld, who
had come over to London with Krassin in the Trade Delegation
in the spring of 1920. Such was one of the first acts of a delegate
from what the British Government chose to regard as a friendly
power. At a Congress of Bolshevist Directors of Propaganda in
Foreign Countries, held at Bremen in December of the same year, it
was stated that the expenses incurred by the Trade Delegation to
London (Kamenev and Krassin) in the organisation of centres
of agitation in Great Britain amounted to £23,750 per month
(.Times, February 1, 1921).
The Triple Alliance.—Constitutional trade union leaders had,
however, become aware of the danger of permeation by Bolshevism.
In 1920 W. A. Appleton had resigned his presidency of the Amster­
dam Internationale (I.F.T.U.) because it was becoming too revolu­
tionary, and his place had been taken by J. H. Thomas. The
Triple Alliance—that is to say, the leaders of miners, railwaymen and
transport workers—then arranged for the General Strike to take
place on April 15, 1921. The defeat of this plan was a terrible
set-back for the revolutionary movement. England having been
the main objective of the world revolutionaries from Marx to
Lenin, the failure to reduce her to chaos meant, momentarily at
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM 79
least, the failure of world revolution. For this failure there were
several causes. The Prime Minister (Lloyd George), who had not
yet discovered the nationalisation of the land to be the solution
of all our troubles, uttered a warning to the nation on the “ Great
Peril,” the rise of a party to power which “ calls itself Labour, but
is really Socialist,” which wants “ to plant the wild and poisonous
berries of Karl Marxism in this country.” There were some people
who thought Socialism was “ merely a bogey,” but he knew it was
“ a terrible machine ” that would “ tear society to pieces ” (Morn­
ing Post, March 24, 1921). At the same time he mobilised his forces
precisely as the present Government did in May 1926. A further
obstacle was provided by the railwaymen, who, it was found at the
last moment, were unwilling to come out.
The result of the railwaymen’s attitude was the decision to call
off the strike on what is known in revolutionary circles as “ black
Friday ” (April 15), and so to defeat the alien plot against England.
It is impossible to attribute this to the restraining influence
on the part of the trade union leaders. At the most critical moment
of the crisis, on April 11, a Manifesto was published by the Triple
Alliance calculated to inflame passions to the highest degree. The
Government was accused of standing in with the mineowners in
an attack on “ Labour,” and of having adopted provocative
measures by organising a defence force in view of the anarchy to
which, as the railwaymen clearly saw, the strike would inevitably
lead :
“ The present governm ent,” said this m anifesto, “ is not an im­
partial arbitrator in industrial negotiations, b u t an active, if secret
partisan, and while it speaks of peace it behaves in a m anner calculated
to encourage war. . . . In addition to calling up the Reserves, it has
adopted the new and odious expedient of forming a volunteer force
as an instrum ent to be used against organised labour. In so doing
it has lightly assumed the grave responsibility of provoking bloodshed
and civil war.
“ Therefore, in view of . . . the obvious, calculated and persistent
hostility of the Governm ent to the working classes, the Triple Alliance
has decided to throw its full weight on the side of the m iners.”
This document bore the names of Herbert Smith and Frank
Hodges on behalf of the Miners’ Federation, of J. H. Thomas, C. T.
Cramp and W. T. Abraham on behalf of the N.U.R., and of
R. Gosling and Robert Williams on behalf of the Transport
Workers’ Federation. (Evening Standard, April 12, 1921).
The I.F.T.U.—A fortnight later, after the collapse of the strike,
the Amsterdam Internationale (I.F.T.U.) published a further call
to class warfare in celebration of May 1, which since 1889 has been
known as “ Labour Day.”
“ This year,” declared the Am sterdam Manifesto, “ the dem on­
stration of Labour m ust be m ightier than ever. Reaction has raised
80 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
up its head more audaciously in all countries ; ever greater is the
resistance of the bourgeoisie to the just dem ands of the workers ;
ever rigorous are the persecutions to which class-conscious organised
workers are subjected by Governments. . . . We need only recall the
horrors perpetrated against our fellow-workers in H ungary, Finland,
Spain, etc. . . , W e need only point out the recalcitrance of leaders
of the League of Nations in dealing effectively w ith the economic
restoration of Europe by solution of the problem of exchange or by
im provem ent in the distribution of raw m aterial. W hat care these
gentlemen if their negligence will contribute everywhere to an increase
of unem ployment, and, consequently, of destitution am ong the working-
classes.”
This was signed by :
J. H. Thomas, Acting President.
L. Jouhaux, 1st Vice-President.
C. Mertens, 2nd Vice-President.
EdoFim m en|Secretariea.
J. Oudegeest J
One might have supposed from this that the I.F.T.U. had gone
red enough to satisfy even the most thorough-going of revolu­
tionaries, but it will be noticed their particular degree of redness has
never been the criterion by which the Bolsheviks of Russia have
judged groups or individuals. This is why the term “ Extremist,”
applied to their supporters in this country, is entirely misleading.
One may go to the most extreme limit of revolutionary violence
without satisfying the present rulers of Russia—as was shown
by their abandonment of Sylvia Pankhurst. The real desideratum
is absolute subservience to the dictatorship of Moscow. This was
the rock on which the Amsterdammers and the Muscovites split:
the former, whilst comprising a number of extreme revolutionaries,
were not, as a whole, prepared to renounce all independence of
action ; further, they committed the unpardonable sin of demanding
that Germany should be made responsible for the damage she had
done diming the war in the devastated regions of France and
Belgium. Consequently it was decided to destroy Amsterdam and
set up an opposition Trade Union Internationale.
Of course, Trade Unionism in Russia could only be a farce, since,
as Robespierre perceived, under the dictatorship of the proletariat
corporations of workers could not logically exist. As Trotsky
himself stated : “ In all Communist States officials are appointed
by the State, and trade unions must only defend the interests of
the workers by helping to raise production, and not by various
exaggerated demands and threats of strikes ” (Pravda,
December 1920).
Hence in Soviet Russia the trade unions, all of quite recent
birth, are not trade unions in our sense of the word at all, but simply
regiments of workers controlled by leaders who are at the same time
members of the Government. This was shown very clearly in the
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM 81
chart published by the United States Congress in 1924, when the
same names were found in the list of trade union leaders and the
Central Executive of the Government of Russia.
In order to bring the workers under the heel of Moscow it was
necessary, however, to set up a pretence of trade union organisa­
tion in Russia. Accordingly, the “ All Russian Congress of Trade
Unions ” was formed in 1918 ; from this arose the “ All Russian
Central Council of Trade Unions” under Tomski (alias Joseph
Isbitsky). At a conference of the Central Executive of the Russian
trade unions held in Moscow on June 15, 1920, at which Robert
Williams and A. A. Purcell were present, the plan of uniting all the
left elements in the trade unions outside Russia was discussed, and
these parleys continued until July 15, when an agreement was
reached between the Russian trade unions, the Italian Federation
of Labour, the Spanish, Jugo-Slav and Bulgarian trade unions to
fight the Amsterdam Internationale, and set up a new Trade Union
International in its place. The propaganda centre thus created was
given the name of “ The International Council of Trade and
Industrial Unions.”
This was the embryo of the R.I.L.U. or “ Red Internationale of
Labour Unions,” known also as the “ Profintern ”—from the
Russian words Professionalye Intemazional—which held its first
Congress from July 3-19 in the following year, 1921. This time
England was represented by Tom Mann, Nat Watkins, J. T. Murphy
and Ellen Wilkinson, and the following International Executive
Committee was formed :
Gen. Sec.: A. Losovsky (alias Solomon Dridzo).
England : Tom Mann.
Germany : Anton Mayer.
Russia : Nogin.
Spain : Orlandez.
United States : George Andreychine.
In the subsidiary propaganda organisations of the R.I.L.U.,
the English representatives included J. T. Murphy (Metal Workers),
Nat Watkins (Miners) and Ellen Wilkinson (Workers’ Union)
(Krassnee Intemazional Profsoyusov, Bulletin Ispolneetelnovo Buro,
No. I).
The foundation of the Red Internationale of Labour Unions was
a triumph of Bolshevik strategy. What the Komintem with its
bureaucratic Communist propaganda had been unable to accomplish
the R.I.L.U. was to succeed in carrying out by appealing to the
corporative spirit of the workers. It was probably this stroke of
diplomacy that turned the whole course of events, that averted the
collapse of Bolshevism in 1921 and brought about the recrudescence
of the revolutionary movement which has led to the crisis of to-day.
Just as the 3rd or Communist Internationale was intended to
defeat the 2nd or Socialist Internationale of Brussels in the political
82 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
field, the R.I.L.U. was instituted to defeat the I.F.T.U. or Amster­
dam Internationale in the industrial field. From this moment the
word “ Yellow ” applied to the 2nd (Socialist) Internationale was
always applied to the Amsterdam Trade Union Internationale,
whilst the word “ Red ” was officially assumed by the Moscow
Trade Union Internationale, of which the propaganda consisted
largely of imprecations against the hated “ Amsterdammers.”
The R.I.L.U. was from the beginning avowedly “ Anarcho-
Syndicalist.” In the resolutions of its 2nd Congress it is stated
th a t: “ The Congress approves of the attempts of the Executive
Bureau to draw all the anarcho-syndicalist organisations into the
R.I.L.U. for the joint struggle against the bourgeoisie and against
reformism.” The adherents of the R.I.L.U. in England, America,
Holland and France were specially charged with the task of Tallying
the workers to the banner of the new Red Internationale. One of
the first bodies to join up with it was the Anarcho-Syndicalist wing
of the French C.G.T. (Confederation Generate du Travail), which on
February 16,1922, constituted itself as the C.G.T.U. (Confederation
Generale du Travail Unitaire) and soon after decided to affiliate
with the R.I.L.U. The leader of this party was Dondicol.
In the United States the T.U.E.L. (Trade Union Educational
League), founded by William Z. Foster, was specially indicated as
the body to be entrusted with the work of the R.I.L.U., whilst a
Council was recommended for co-ordinating the work of the minori­
ties in the A.F. of L., the I.W.W. and the independent unions.
The most active of the latter were :
(1) The Amalgamated Clothing Workers’Union, a split from the
“ United Garment Workers of America,” dated from 1914, and
working particularly for the idea of the “ One Big Union.” The
President was Joseph Hillman and the leading members were :
Joseph Schlossberg
Hyman Lumberg
Samuel Levin
A. D. Marimmpetri
August Bellanca
Alex Kohen
Lazarus Mariovitz
Frank Rosenblum
(2) The International Ladies’ Garment Workers’Union, started
in connection with the Rand School in 1914 ; the President was
Benjamin Schlesinger, Fania M. Cohn Vice-President, and the
official organ Justice, with S. Wyonopsky as editor and E. Lieber-
mann as business manager. This was affiliated with the “ Workers’
Defence Union,” of which Benjamin Schlesinger was also the
President and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn the principal leader.
(3) The “ Amalgamated Textile Workers,” started in 1919 with
A. J. Muste as General Secretary.
In a report discovered at the Bridgman raid of 1922 it was
stated :
“ A t best the prospects of our influencing the labour m ovement
are m ainly in the predom inantly Jewish organisations like the In ter­
THE CAPTURE OF TRADE UNIONISM 83
national Ladies’ G arm ent Workers, Amalgamated Clothing W orkers,
H at, Cap and Millinery Workers, etc. Our activities in the I.W .W .
have led to their liquidation in a num ber of E astern cities.”
The R.I.L.U. now formed the rallying point for all these revo­
lutionary groups, and found in William Z. Foster its most valuable
agent. At the Bridgman Convention he pointed out that the failure
of the Socialist Party had been not to understand the importance
of industrial work :
“ The Communist P arty is not going to m ake the same m istake.
This laying so m uch stress on the im portance of the trade union work
is one of the m ost helpful features of the movement. W hen we lay
stress on the im portance of this work, we realise th at we m ust capture
the trade unions if we w ant to get anywhere. Different Communists
differ as to the im portance of capturing the unions in the revolutionary
struggle. Some say th a t the trade union does not am ount to anything ;
th at it is ju st a neutral organisation and will never become a revolu­
tionary unit. Others say th a t it is one of the really revolutional instru­
m ents of the workers and will function as such in the revolutionary
struggle. Syndicalists take the position th a t trade union work is
the only thing. Although we m ay differ as to the positive value of
the trade union work, we m ust agree with the negative, namely, th a t
it is absolutely impossible to have a revolution in the country unless
we will control the mass trade unions. This fact alone should justify
the policy th a t the Com munist P arty of the U nited States is working
out. If we wish a revolution, we m ust have their support. After
our delegation came back from Moscow last year, it brought with us
a program which we thought was a good practical program for
this country, and we w ant to tell you this— a lot of people say th a t
those in Moscow do not understand the situation. I w ant to dispute
that. I found in the R ed Trades Union International and in the
Communist International and generally in Moscow, a keen under­
standing of the fundam entals of our situation in this country. I can
say th a t I found a better understanding of the general fundam ental
situation in America than we can boast of here. I t was a peculiar
thing to find men like R adek and Lenin telling American revolutionary
organisations th a t their industrial policy was wrong” (The. Reds in
America, p. 29).
So were “ free-born Americans” to be taught to manage their
own affairs by middle-class doctrinaires in the East of Europe with
no history of trade union organisation behind them.
CHAPTER IX
British Bureau of R.I.L.U.—In England the R.I.L.U. of n
found allies ready to hand. In December 1920 J. T. Murphj
back from Russia with plans for the organisation of the moven
and in this same month the “ British Bureau ” of the “ Provisii
International Council of Trade and Industrial Unions” was est;
lished in Manchester, with George Peet (of Manchester) correspondii.
secretary and E. Lismer (of Sheffield) as organising secretary.
An inaugural meeting was held on January 23, 1921, with the
following as members of the Bureau :
Chairman : Tom Mann, A.E.U., formerly Gen. Secretary I.L.P.
and leader of the Industrial Syndicalist League, “ Hands Off
Russia ” Committee.
J. T. Murphy, A.E.U., formerly on Executive Committee S.L.P.,
C.P.G.B., British representative on I.K.K.I.
Robert Williams, Secretary National Transport Workers’ Federa­
tion, I.L.P., “ Hands Off Russia ” Committee, director of Daily
Herald, Council of Action (1920).
A. A. Purcell, N.A.F.T.A., C.P.G.B., now M.P.
Emile Burns, N.U.C.
G. Kay.
V. Williams, Yorkshire Miners’ Association.
T. Bell, Scottish Iron Moulders.
Amongst those who later joined the movement were :
Mrs. M. Bamber, National Union of Distributive and Allied Workers.
Ellen Wilkinson, now M.P. (N.U.D.A.W.), C.P.G.B., and British
delegate to Moscow R.I.L.U.
Robert Page Arnot, N.U.C., C.P.G.B.
A. J. Cook, Executive Committee M.F.G.B., I.L.P.
Noah Ablett, Executive Committee M.F.G.B.
Richard Coppock, General Secretary National Federation Building
Trade Operatives.
Harry Pollitt, boiler-maker, C.P.G.B.
Jack Tanner (A.E.U.), formerly Syndicalist and I.W.W.
George Hardy, formerly I.W.W.
In September 1921 the British Bureau of the R.I.L.U. was
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UN,
84
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UNIONISM 85
transferred from Manchester to London, with offices at 3 Wellington
Street, Strand.
The Constitution of the Bureau stated that it should be inde­
pendent of the Communist Party of Great Britain but should work
in co-operation with it, thus making it clear that the British Bureau
was not the outcome of the British Communists, but was directly
under the control of the Executive of the Profintern in Moscow,
just as the British Communist Party was under the control of the
Executive of the Komintern.
A further clause in the Constitution declared th a t:
“ The Bureau and its Committees shall conduct a vigorous campaign
within the trade unions on behalf of the R .I. of L.U., prepare the
programmes of action for adoption by the unions as alternatives to
the compromising programmes of the yellow leaders of Amsterdam,
and do all in its power to revolutionise the practice of the unions and
draw them into the Red International of Labour Unions.”
The two organs of the British Bureau were All Power (monthly),
edited by H. Pollitt, and The Worker (weekly), published in Glasgow
and previously the organ of the National Workers’ Committee.
The British Bureau of the R.I.L.U. thus formed the first junction
between the Syndicalist and Communist movements in this country.
With Tom Mann, the old Syndicalist leader, at its head and Noah
Ablett, who had figured in the “ Mines for the Miners Movement ”
in 1913, supported by A. A. Purcell, one of the prime movers of the
C.P.G.B., the two camps hitherto hostile had now established a
point of contact which was to develop three years later into a larger
organisation.
National Minority Movement.—This was the National Minority
Movement, which began as the National Miners’Minority Movement,
and was inaugurated at an R.I.L.U. conference of miners in London
on January 26, 1924. Nat Watkins of the Moscow organisation
was appointed organising secretary.
Minority groups were then formed in other important industries,
so that the movement now consists of the following six groups :
Miners’ Minority Movement.
Transport Workers’ Minority Movement.
Metal Workers’ Minority Movement.
Building Workers’ Minority Movement.
General Workers’ Minority Movement.
Printers’ Section.
The Executive of the combined movement was formed as
follows :
Hon. Chairman : Tom Mann.
Gen. Secretary : H. Pollitt.
Organising Secretary : George Hardy.
86 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
After Pollitt’s imprisonment in November 1925, George Hardy
became Acting-General Secretary and his place as Organising
Secretary was taken by Nat Watkins, now on the Presidium of the
Executive Committee of the R.I.L.U. in Moscow.
Other leading members of the movement are Wal Hannington,
Tom Quelch, Loeber, Horner, Sam Elsbury, Thom, Booth, etc.
The offices of the National Minority Movement are at 38 Great
Ormonde Street, London, and its official organs are The Worker
and The Mine Worker.
It is usual to describe the National Minority Movement as the
outcome of the British Communist Party. This is incorrect. The
Minority Movement developed historically from Syndicalism,
beginning with the Industrial Syndicalist Educational League of
1910, under Tom Mann, through the Miners’ Reform Movement
and the British Bureau of the R.I.L.U., at which point the alliance
with Communism was made. This was directly carried out under
the orders of the “ Profintern.” In the Foreword written by Tom
Quelch to the English translation of the Resolutions and Decisions
of the Third World Congress of the R. I.L. I/., the Minority Movement
of Great Britain is referred to as having been initiated and inspired
by the R.I.L.U. Amongst the resolutions passed at this Congress,
which took place in Moscow in July 1924, we read the following :
“ I t is a question of conquering the minds of the masses, of winning
them for the idea of Communism. No m atter how obnoxious the
Labour bureaucracy, and it is becoming more obnoxious every day,
the revolutionary work within the Labour organisations should be
continued steadily and system atically. . . . Sensing the approaching
danger, the Labour bureaucracy sweeps away the rem nants of dem o­
cracy in the trade unions ; everything is decided by the officialdom.
I t is necessary to strengthen the struggle against the union officialdom,
etc.” (The Tasks of the International Trade Union Movement, p. 9.
Published by the National M inority Movement, 38 G reat Ormonde
Street, W .C.l).
Further on the mandarins of Moscow observe :
“ NOT ONE MASS ACTION OF THE BRITISH PROLETARIAT
MUST TAKE PLACE WITHOUT OUR PARTICIPATION” (Ibid., p.
77).
So the British workers were not only to be turned against their
employers, but against their own trade union officials, provided these
were not prepared to take their orders from Moscow—the tyranny
of native leaders was to be replaced by the tyranny of a foreign
power. This was the real meaning of the “ One Big Union ” idea,
borrowed from the American I.W.W.—no longer a union among
the workers of the world, but the uniting of the workers of the world
under the yoke of the Moscow bureaucracy. These British trade
union leaders who joined the Minority Movement thus proclaimed
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UNIONISM 87
themselves traitors to Trade Unionism and the agents of a foreign
power.
It was at this same conference in Moscow that the promoters
of the National Minority Movement in England received their
orders and the inaugural conference was announced to take place in
London in the following month of August 1924.
It will be seen, then, that the Minority Movement did not develop
out of the Communist Party of Great Britain, but out of the Syndica­
list movement afterits capture by the Red Trade Union International
of Moscow. The C.P.G.B., however, is now definitely linked up
with the Minority Movement, and at the 1925 Congress of the
Party two leaders of the Minority Movement—George Hardy and
Nat Watkins—were present as “ fraternal delegates.”
By means of this intensive propaganda carried on by Communist
agents amongst the industrial workers, the British Trade Union
movement had veered steadily more and more towards Moscow.
An obstacle was, however, presented by the International Federa­
tion of Trade Unions, or Amsterdam International, which still
refused to affiliate with the R.I.L.U. In 1924 the personnel of the
I.F.T.U. was as follows :
President : J. H. Thomas, M.P. (Great Britain).
Vice-President: L. Jouhaux (France).
C. Mertens (Belgium).
Th. Leipart (Germany).
Secretaries : J. Oudegeest (Holland), J. Sassenbach (Germany),
J. W. Brown (Great Britain).
These were leaders denounced by Moscow as “ yellow ” or “ re­
formist”; nevertheless, the I.F.T.U. had its Left or “ Red” Wing,
which included such men as A. A. Purcell (R.I.L.U.), George Hicks
and Edo Fimmen, the Dutchman. In 1925 J. H. Thomas was
replaced by A. A. Purcell, the rest of the Executive remaining the
same.
From the time of its formation the R.I.L.U. of Moscow had
“ conducted a furious campaign ” against the I.F.T.U., particularly
during the year 1921-22, and declared its intentions of destroying
“ that pestilent yellow lair.” In Article II, Clause 4, of the Rules
of the R.I.L.U., it was stated th a t:
“ The object of the Red International of Labour Unions is the
am algam ation of all revolutionary class elements of the International
Trades Union Movement, and the waging of a definite war w ith the
International Labour Office a t the League of Nations, and w ith the
I.F.T.U . of A m sterdam , which, as a result of its programme and
general policy, constitutes a rallying point for the international
bourgeoisie.”
The I.F.T.U. therefore continued to refuse to negotiate with the
R.I.L.U.
88 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The T.U.C.—Meanwhile the T.U.C. (Trades Union Congress)
had developed a strong Left Wing. As we have seen earlier, a
National Joint Council had been arranged by the T.U.C. and Labour
Party in 1921. Since then the T.U.C. had continued to move
steadily to the Left, and by 1925 it had fallen completely under
the control of its Left Wingers. In that year its leaders consisted
of the following:
President: A. B. Swales (A.E.U.), I.L.P.
Vice-Chairman: A. A. Purcell, I.F.T.U., R.I.L.U.
Secretary : Fred Bramley (N.A.F.T.U.), I.L.P.
(All these were now made hororary members of the Moscow
Soviet, see Sunday Worker, April 19, 1925.)
Assist. Secretary : W. M. Citrine (Electrical Trade Unions),
I.L.P.
The T.U.C. being affiliated to the I.F.T.U., and the same allies
of Moscow figuring in the Executive of both, it was easy to
arrange a plan of combined action. An ingenious ruse was
devised. Neither the I.F.T.U. as a body nor the T.U.C. were
willing to join up with Losovsky and the Profintern—the open
appropriation of the name “ Red International ” by the latter
being calculated to alarm sane trade unionists—but what was there
to prevent an entente with the trade unionists of Russia who did
not designate themselves by this objectionable adjective ? The
bridge leading to Losovsky and the R.I.L.U. being impassable,
another bridge to Moscow must be constructed, leading to Tomski
and the All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions.
That such an alliance was from the point of view of orthodox
Trade Unionism as much a farce as the other would have been, is
evident from the fact that the All Russian Central Council of Trade
Unions, formed in 1919, was under the R.I.L.U. and therefore simply
a department of the Soviet Government; Tomski, its President,
was a member of the Presidium of the TS.I.K. (Central Executive
Committee of the U.S.S.R.); and all the following members of its
Executive—Rykov, Rudzutak.Andreiev, Losovsky (of the R.I.L.U.),
Schmidt, Evdokimov, Lutovinov, Melnichansky, Dogadov, Antipov,
Lepse and Seniushkin—were, or had been at some time, also mem­
bers of the TS.I.K., that is to say, of the Russian Government.
The overture came from Tomski himself, who appeared at the
Hull Congress of the T.U.C. in 1924 to convey fraternal greetings
from the All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions and appeal
for “ international unity.” This proposal was enthusiastically
received, and it was immediately decided to send a delegation to
Russia to attend the Congress of the All Russian Council and report
on conditions under Soviet rule (Labour Year Book, 1925).
The delegates, who left London on November 7, 1924, and
returned on December 19, were Purcell, Herbert Smith, John
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UNIONISM 89
Bromley, Ben Tillett, A. A. H. Findlay, John Turner and Fred
Bramley. As might be expected from the known sympathies of the
majority of these delegates, they found everything delightful on
arrival: Purcell declared that “ Soviet Russia was the first bright
jewel in the world’s working-class crown,” and Tillett described it
as “ the hope of the world’s workers ” (Daily Telegraph, December 5,
1924). The Report, published a year later by the delegation and
accepted by their British comrades, met with ridicule from Con­
tinental Socialists. Thus Friedrich Adler, ex-secretary of the
L.S.I. (Labour Socialist International), wrote :
“ I m ust openly confess th a t never since the excesses of the German
Social-Imperialists during the war have I read a book th a t has so
shocked me by the baseness of its outlook and the shamelessness of its
assertion as this rep o rt” (Morning Post, June 2, 1925).
The largest group of German trade unions—the Allgemeine
Deutsche Gewerkschaftbund—published the following denunciation:
“ U npleasant facts are passed over with diplom atic subtleness
and the compilers are not afraid even of lies in order to p u t the Russian
system in a better light. . . . I t is shocking th a t seven trade unionists
whose nam es were held in repute should go to Russia for study and
circulate to the international world a wretched and clumsy piece of
work in the form of a report. The Bolsheviks m ust be laughing up
their sleeves” (Daily M ail, October 26, 1925).
Trade Union Unity Movement.—In the course of this visit to
Russia, the British delegates arranged with the All Russian Council
to set up a joint committee, and in December the plan for the
“ Anglo-Russian Trade Union Unity Committee ” was definitely
formulated by the Left Wingers of the T.U.C., with the hearty
approval of The Worker, organ of the R.I.L.U., The Workers'
Weekly (C.P.G.B.) and of Tom Mann, who pressed the idea at a con­
ference of the National Trades Council in the following March,
whilst Losovsky himself sent a telegram of congratulation, addressed
to the Sunday Worker. The new movement thus had all the
Communist elements at its back.
An invitation was now sent (March 1925) by the General Council
of the T.U.C. to the All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions
to send delegates over to England for a Conference in April. The
invitation was accepted and seven representatives arrived, led by
no other than Tomski himself. The conference was composed as
follows :
All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions :
M. Tomski N. P. Glebov-Avilov
V. M. Mikhailov Olga Chemishova
G. N. Melnichansky V. Y. Yarotsky
I. I. Lepse
90 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
General Council of British T.U.C. :
A. B. Swales
A. A. Purcell
H. Boothman
J. W. Bowen
G. Hicks
W. Thorne, M.P.
Ben Tillett
Julia Varley
R. B. Walker
Fred Bramley
George Young
E. L. Poulton
It should be noted that at any rate the first four names on the
Russian delegation were those ofmen who were, or had been, members
of the Central Executive Committee of the Russian Soviet Republics.
By conferring with these people the British trade unionists were,
therefore, not negotiating with fellow trade unionists, but with
what corresponded to the Cabinet Ministers of a foreign government
violently hostile to Great Britain. What would have been said if
the British Fascists had invited a number of Signor Mussolini’s
ministers over to this country in order to confer with them on the
project of overthrowing Parliament and replacing it by a Fascist
regime ? We cannot doubt that such a proceeding would have been
found contrary to the Constitution of Great Britain. But to the
advent of the Bolshevik delegation no obstacle was offered. The
Soviet Press itself could only account for this by the supposition
that the Conservative Cabinet was now “ climbing down ” (Morning
Post, March 31, 1925).
The result of admitting these delegates, described by the Morning
Post as “ all specially trained agitators and propagandists of purely
‘intellectual ’ origin, and in no way representative of the Russian
working masses ” was naturally an intensification of the revolu­
tionary movement in the British trade unions. In this same month
of April the first number of the official organ of the new movement,
Trade Union Unity, appeared, published by the Labour Research
Department at 1 6 2 a Buckingham Palace Road. The editorial
board was composed of Left Wingers belonging both to the T.U.C.
and the I.F.T.U.—A. A. Purcell, George Hicks and also the Dutch
Left Wing member of the I.F.T.U., Edo Fimmen.
Amongst contributors to Trade Union Unity have been A. B.
Swales (Chairman of the British Trades Union Congress), Fred
Bramley (Secretary of the same), Herbert Smith (President of the
Miners’ Federation of Great Britain), Ben Turner (General President
of the National Union of Textile Workers), Ben Tillett (Transport
and General Workers’ Union), John Bromiey, M.P. (General Secre­
tary of Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen),
Arthur Pugh (General Secretary of the Iron and Steel Trades
Federation), etc. The May number (1925) contained a message of
hearty congratulation from Tomski (Joseph Isbitsky), Chairman of
the All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions, together with a
portrait of this personage.
The attitude of Trade Union Unity hae throughout been
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UNIONISM 91
antagonistic to the I.F.T.U., to which its directors belong, and
derisive towards the old I.F.T.U. leaders, such as Oudegeest, Mertens
and Jouhaux—an attitude constituting treachery, not only to
orthodox, that is to say non-political, Trade Unionism, but also
towards Trade Unionism that works for Socialism without accepting
the dictatorship of Moscow.
The further result of permitting the so-called Russian delega­
tion—which had promised to refrain from propaganda—to land
in this country and inoculate Trade Unionism still further with the
Bolshevist virus was seen at the Conferences of the National Minority
Movement and of the T.U.C. that followed.
At the former, which took place on August 29 and 30, 1925, with
Tom Mann in the chair, the necessity of doing away with the British
Empire was openly proclaimed. Saklatvala declared : “ I denounce
the Empire in the name of the working-classes. I am an implacable
enemy of the Union Jack ” (Great applause). H. Pollitt observed
th a t: “ The British Empire, as at present constituted, stands for
the exploitation of the workers ” (More applause). Amongst the
speakers were A. Gossip and Nat Watkins. Plans were put forward
for Councils of Action, for a Workers’ Defence Corps, Factory Com­
mittees and for further capturing the Co-operative Movement.
“ The m achinery of the Co-operatives is an essential alliance in
the coming struggle for the feeding of the strikers’ wives and families.
We m ust get inside the Co-ops. and link them up w ith the Trade
Unions, ready for collective action. Every Trade U nionist should be
a Co-operator and every Co-operator a Trade Unionist.”
The Annual Conference of the T.U.C. took place at Scarborough
in the following month of September. Tomski was once more
present, together with Dogadofi, a member of the Presidium of the
Profintem and formerly of the TS.I.K. The Conference then
presented Tomski with a gold watch as a token of respect.
Resolutions were put forward in favour of the “ One Big Union ”
scheme, of the destruction of (British) Capitalism and of the break­
up of the British Empire, and the two latter were carried by huge
majorities :
Resolution carried by 2,456,000 votes to 1,218,000 :
“ This Congress declares th a t the Trade Union m ovem ent m ust
organise to prepare the Trade Unions in conjunction w ith the party
of the workers to struggle for the overthrow of Capitalism.
“ A t the same tim e Congress warns the workers against all attem pts
to introduce capitalist schemes of co-partnership which in the past
have failed to give the workers any positive rights, b u t instead have
usually served as fetters retarding the forward movements.
“ Congress further considers th a t strong, well-organised Shop
Committees are indispensable weapons in the struggle to force the
capitalists to relinquish their grip on industry, and, therefore, pledges
itself to do all in its power to develop and strengthen workshop organisa­
tion.”
92 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Resolution adopted by 3,082,000 votes to 79,000 :
“ This Trades Union Congress believes th a t the dom ination of
non-British peoples by the British Government is a form of capitalist
exploitation having for its object the securing for British capitalists
(1) of cheap sources of raw m aterials ; (2) the right to exploit cheap
and unorganised labour and to use the com petition of th a t labour to
degrade the workers’ standards in G reat Britain.
“ I t declares its complete opposition to Imperialism, and resolves
(1) to support the workers in all parts of the British Em pire to organise
the Trade Unions and political parties in order to further their interests,
and (2) to support the right of all peoples in the British Em pire to self-
determ ination, including the right to choose complete separation from
the Em pire.” (Labour Year Book, 1926.)
After the conference Citrine and George Hicks went back to
Russia with Tomski and Dogadofi.
So much for the assurances given to the constitutional press in
the previous month by Fred Bramley, secretary of the General
Council of the T.U.C., that the revolutionaries who talked about
class warfare were not likely to enlist the help of trade union leaders
and did not represent trade union opinion in this country.
Much comfort was derived by the public from the fact that at
the Annual Conference of the Labour Party that began at Liverpool
soon after the T.U.C. Conference at Scarborough, on September 29,
affiliation with the Communist Party was rejected by an over­
whelming majority.
In reality the opposing decisions of the two congresses merely
marked a stage in the struggle for power between rival bodies.
The “ moderates ” of the Labour Party had realised that the
centre of gravity had shifted from 33 to 32 Eccleston Square,
headquarters of the T.U.C., whilst the extremists saw that 16 King
Street had been superseded by 38 Great Ormonde Street. The
doctrinaires of both Socialism and Communism saw that they could
no longer retain their hold even on the “ revolutionary proletariat.”
This fact became clear under the late Labour Government. In the
May 1924 number of New Standards :a Journal of Workers’ Control,
edited by Mr. and Mrs. G. D. H. Cole, the apostle of Guild Socialism
observed that the advent of a Labour Government had “ given
place to a mood of criticism and dissatisfaction.” The assumption
of office had brought the active men of the Labour movement
“ face to face with realities ” ; and the questions had arisen :
“ Where are we going ? What are we trying to do ? ”
“ For years past the Labour m ovem ent has been living on its own
hump. I t has done no fresh thinking. I t has moved forward by the
m om entum of ideas already old and in need of re-statem ent.”
And G. D. H. Cole concluded with this lament:
“ In plain term s, the Communist P arty is a failure, the I.L.P. is
played out, the S.D.F. is a mere haven of refuge for Socialists ill a t
THE BOLSHEVISATION OF BRITISH TRADE UNIONISM 93
ease in other groups, the Fabian Society a mere table-rapping voice
from the dead, and the Guild Socialist movement alm ost non-existent
as an effective force.”
In a word, “ advanced thinkers ” had awakened to find them­
selves “ back numbers,” Mr. Cole’s pet brand of Socialism was now
stigmatised as reactionary by the R.I.L.U. (see denunciation of
Guild Socialism in Report of the Third Congress of the Profintern
in Moscow, July 1924, p. 71, English trans.), and his own Labour
Research Department was passing out of the hands of the Intel­
lectuals into those of Communist trade union leaders.
Labour Research Department.—In 1925 the personnel of the
L.R.D.—which must not be confused with the “ Joint Research
Department of the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party ”
—was as follows :
George Hicks
A. L. Bacharach
G. Burgneay
Emile Burns
A. J. Cook
Maurice H. Dobb
The address of the L.R.D. is now 162 Buckingham Palace Road.
The Plebs League, at the same address as the above, had in
1925 the following Executive :
Hon. Secretary : Winifred Horrabin
Office Secretary : Kathleen Starr
Executive Committee : M. H. Dobb
George Hicks
Cedar Paul
R. W. Postgate
M. Philips Price
Mark Starr
Ellen Wilkinson
The National Council of Labour Colleges, of which the Plebs
is the official organ, had at the same date a large Executive, includ­
ing the following :
Hon. President: A. A. Purcell
President: J. Hamilton
Gen. Secretary : J. P. M. Millar
Treasurer: Mark Starr
G. S. Aitken
C. Brown
W. Coxon
W. T. A. Foot
R. Coppock
A. Gossip
J. Gregory
Rajani P. Dutt
J. T. W. Newbold
Harry Pollitt
Ellen Wilkinson
R. Page Arnot
94 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The head office of the N.C.L.C. is at 22 Elm Row, Edinburgh.
The London Labour College, founded in 1909, is at 13 Penyween
Road, Earl’s Court, London. Secretary : W. T. A. Foot.
In an interesting series of articles by W. Faulkner in the Patriot
for September 24, October 1 and 8, 1925, an account was given of
the dispute between the N.C.L.C and the Workers’ Educational
Association, founded twenty-two years ago and regarded as too
moderate by the N.C.L.C., which is now in full control of the
whole Labour College movement.
CHAPTER X
SUBSIDIARY COMMUNIST ORGANISATIONS
I n 1925 the Central Executive of the Communist Party of Great
Britain was as follows :
Chairman : A. MacManus.
H. Pollitt
J. R. Campbell
William Gallacher
T. Bell
J. T. Murphy
R. P. Arnot
A. Inkpin
R. Stewart
R. P. Dutt
W. Hannington
C. M. Roebuck
T. A. Jackson
Mrs. Helen Crawfurd
A. Horner
William Joss
A. Ferguson
Beth Turner
Nat Watkins
E. H. Brown
One of the most dangerous illusions is to suppose that the
strength of Communism in this country is to be estimated by the
membership of the C.P.G.B. (Communist Party of Great Britain),
which the Communists themselves are anxious to assure us stands
only at 5,000 and has remained throughout stationary. (Note the
reiteration of this figure by one speaker after another at the last
Congress of the C.P.G.B.) In reality, the number of members is
probably a good deal larger, but the important point is that member­
ship of the official Communist Party in this country is not essential
to being a leading member of the Communist organisation in this
country. As has been shown in the preceding chapters, some of
the most ardent Communist propagandists and even the most
dangerous revolutionaries in Great Britain do not figure, at
any rate openly, on the lists of the British Communist Party, but
belong to such bodies as the Plebs League, Labour Research Depart­
ment, I.L.P., or, again, to such avowedly Communist organisations
as the R.I.L.U. and Minority Movement, under the control, not of
the C.P.G.B., but of Moscow itself.
But besides these larger organisations, from 1921 onwards a
number of subsidiary groups have been formed by agents both of
the Komintern and of the Profintern in this country. These are
as follows :
66
96 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The N.U.W.C.M.—Passing over the Young Communist League,
which will be dealt with in the Youth Section of this book, we come
to the “ Unemployed Committees,” which Zinoviev ordered the
West European Secretariat of the I.K.K.I. to create and develop
as affiliations of the International Union of Unemployed. This
Union, Zinoviev in the same circular went on to observe, “ may
become one of the secret ramifications of our organisation in Western
Europe, and serve as a base for the future work of the Secretariat.
. . . By means of skilful manoeuvres, the International Union of
Unemployed will constitute an efficacious means for the complete
overthrow of capitalism, not only in Western Europe, but through­
out the entire world ” (Sunday Pictorial, June 21, 1925).
In conformity with this policy, the R.I.L.U. of Moscow ordered
its British members to reorganise the Unemployed Committees in
this country, thus bringing them under the control of Moscow
(Second World Congress of the R.I.L.U. : Resolutions and Decisions
published by the British Bureau of the R.I.L.U., 3 Wellington
Street, Strand, W.C.2 (1922), pp. 27 and 45). Accordingly, at the
end of 1921 the National Unemployed Workers’ Committee Move­
ment was formed, with offices, first at 3 Queen Square, now at
105 Hatton Garden, E.C.l.
The National Organiser of the N.U.W.C.M., which is affiliated
with the C.P.G.B., was Wal Hannington, C.P.G.B. and R.I.L.U.,
who still retains this post. Amongst the leading members of the
movement were Harry Homer, C.P.G.B. and R.I.L.U., George
Cooke, Horace Newbold, George Wheeler, Holt, Haye, Jackson,
Buxton, etc.
The so-called “ Hunger Marches ” on London that took place
in November 1922 were carried out by this body. A number of
the marchers, finding they had been duped by the leaders of the
N.U.W.C.M. returned home in disgust, their return fares being
provided through the generosity of the public. One of the marchers
declared : “ It is cruel that men should be deluded by being asked
to march all the way from Scotland and the north of England,
when nothing can be done for them by the National Unemployed
Workers’Committee Movement. All that has been done for us is to
feed us on a lot of Communist propaganda in which we have no
interest whatever ” (Daily Mail, December 1, 1922).
Another activity of the N.U.W.C.M. is the organisation of
“ Unemployment Sunday.” This was celebrated last year (1925)
on June 21, when meetings were arranged in co-operation with the
General Council of the T.U.C., and addressed by Purcell, Swales,
Robert Williams, George Hicks and Ben Tillett.
At a special conference of the I.L.P. on December 13, 1925,
J. Allen Skinner moved that “ the conference viewed with satisfac­
tion the continued co-operation of the T.U.C. General Council,
with the National Unemployed Workers’ Committee Movement.”
R. G. Bowyer opposed the resolution, saying that “ there was no
SUBSIDIARY COMMUNIST ORGANISATIONS 97
use for the N.U.W.C.M. in the Trade Union movement as a whole.
It was a subversive and disruptive movement, and it was merely
used to increase the Communist representation on the Trades
Councils and at the Trades Congress.” Nevertheless the resolution
was adopted. (Morning Post, December 14, 1925).
The N.U.W.C.M. has thus a double connection with Moscow
—directly with the Profintem, and indirectly with the Komintern
through the C.P.G.B. and through the Bolshevist sympathisers in
the T.U.C. At the last Congress of the C.P.G.B. (June I, 1925), it
was officially represented by its assistant secretary, Fred Douglas.
The organ of the movement is Out of Work.
W.I.R.—Next in order of formation was the Workers’ Inter­
national Relief.
The central body to which it belongs had been formed on
December 4, 1921, under the inspiration of the Komintern at a Con­
ference held in Berlin, presided over by the well-known Spartacist
and “ Special ” member of the I.K.K.I., Clara Zetkine. The organi­
sation took the name of “ Meshrabpom,” from the Russian words
Mejdu Rabochim Pomoch, meaning, literally, Inter-Workers’ Aid
(The Worker, organ of the R.I.L.U in Glasgow. Article by Freiherr
von Schoenaich, September 12, 1925). A provisional committee
was formed and headquarters established at 11 Unter den Linden,
Berlin, under the direction of Willi Miinzenberg. The following
were elected to the Presidium :
Clara Zetkine.
Krestinski, representative of the All Russian Relief Committee
in Berlin.
Grassmann, General Federation of Labour, Germany.
Coates, — (Zelda Kahan ?).
Madeleine Marx, member of “ Clarte.”
The ostensible purpose of the W.I.R. was the relief of famine
in Russia, Southern Ireland, etc., the establishment of soup kitchens
in Berlin and other German towns. We note, however, that the
W.I.R. has never thought of starting soup kitchens for the suffering
poor of London. On the contrary, when an appeal was made for
canteens for the London unemployed the Daily Herald, con­
trolled by George Lansbury, one of the Vice-Presidents of the
W.I.R., wrote :
“ The letter is an appeal for a familiar object— soup kitchens. . . .
Soup kitchen statesm anship, however well-intentioned, is b u t tinkering
of the feeblest kind ” (Date of February 23, 1923).
Yet in the Daily Herald of January 23, 1923, had appeared a
glowing panegyric of the same idea when carried out by the W .I.R.:
“ The organisation for the Russian W orkers’ International Relief
is now working full steam here in providing hot meals and soup kitchens
for unemployed and starving families in the German towns.”
98 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Apparently only German workers were to have Communist
propaganda washed down with hot soup. For this was, of course,
the real object of the W.I.R., as indicated in one of its official
communications :
“ The W .I.R. has united all sections of the workers internationally
on the basis of class-conscious impartial relief [note the contradiction
between these two adjectives !]. The W .I.R. is the first international
expression of the U nity of W orkers, and has united all tendencies and
sections of the Labour Movement ” (An open letter to delegates to the
M inority Movement Conference, date of January 25, 1923).
That this last pretension was false is shown by the strong
denunciation of the W.I.R. by Dr. Friedrich Adler (President
of the Austrian Workers’ Councils, and later one of the two secre­
taries of the L.S.I. or Second International), who was present
at the inaugural conference in Berlin, and declared that he was able
to see with his own eyes its purely Communist administration in
every detail. (Labour Magazine, December 1924).
According to the detailed minutes of the W.I.R in the possession
of the L.S.I., it was stated as one of the rules of the organisation
that in forming National Committees “ the Secretary chosen
by the Committee is responsible for his activities to the Committee,
and to the central office in Berlin. It is the duty of the Communist
representative on this Committee to see to it that the Secretary
is a Communist.”
In April 1923 an appeal was sent out by the British branch of
the association which was described as the W.I.R.R. (Workers’
International Russian Relief), but some four months later the second
R. was dropped, and the name W.I.R. was retained. Amongst the
Vice-Presidents and members at this date were George Lansbury,
N. Klishko of the Russian Trade Delegation in 1923, J. T. W.
Newbold, C.P.G.B., the Rev. H. Dunnico, leader of the “ Peace
Society,” A. A. Purcell, C.P.G.B., T.U.C., Edgar T. Whitehead,
Philip Rabinovitch of Arcos (All Russian Co-operative Society),
etc. The official organ of the movement was the Soviet Russia
Pictorial, later known as the Workers' International Pictorial.
As Dr. Adler had pointed out with regard to the Berlin group :
“ Under the cloak of humanity they appeal to all kind-hearted
people, and are always successful with this method.” Yet occa­
sionally the ruse failed, as in the case of Mrs. Katherine Bruce
Glasier (I.L.P. and Fabian Society), who, having been drawn into the
movement under the guise of helping starving children, denounced
it in unmeasured terms as an engine of class warfare—an accusa­
tion which met with no official repudiation (see her letter and reply
by the W.I.R. reproduced in the Patriot for April 23, 1923).
In 1925 the leading members of the W.I.R. were given officially
as follows :
SUBSIDIARY COMMUNIST ORGANISATIONS 99
International Centre in Berlin.
Germany : Miinzenberg, Ledebour, Clara Zetkine.
France : Reynaud, Toller, Henri Barbusse (founder of “ Clarte,"
a secret society under the direction of the Grand Orient,
see later, p. 103).
Russia . Gasparowa, Kameneva.
Ireland : Mrs. Despard, Larkin, McBride, Daly, Lawlor.
Australia : Pickard.
Italy : Misiano.
The British organisation was as follows :
Headquarters : 26 Bedford Row, London, W.C.l.
Vice-Presidents :
Alfred Barnes, M.P. G. Lansbury
J. Bromley J. T. W. Newbold
Alexander Gossip J. O’Grady, M.P.
David Kirkwood W. Straker
N. Klishko A. A. Purcell, M.P.
Executive Committee :
Chairman : H. J. May (Sec., International Co-operative Alliance)
Mrs. Helen Crawfurd Mrs. Winifred Horrabin
Rev. H. Dunnico, M.P. (Hon. Sec., Plebs League)
Miss A. Honora Enfield George Lansbury, M.P.
(Sec.,Women’s Co-op. Guild) Miss Nellie Lansbury
W. N. Ewer
Mrs. Ewer
Walter Holmes
Miss Ella Klein
Neil McLean, M.P.
W. McLaine, C.P.G.B.
Dr. V. N. Polovtsev
Philip Rabinovitch
Miss Rose Cohen, C.P.G.B.
Mrs. Montefiore, C.P.G.B.
Mrs. Marjorie Newbold
Mrs. Hilda Saxe-Meynell
S. Saklatvala, C.P.G.B.
Miss Evelyn Sharp
Mrs. Mark Starr
Robert Stewart, C.P.G.B.
Miss Ellen Wilkinson
Dr. Robert Dunstan, I.L.P.
Dr. Margaret Dunstan
Secretary : Mrs. Helen Crawfurd, C.P.G.B.
The headquarters of the Irish Committee are at 47 Parnell
Square, Dublin. Hon. Secretary, R. Stewart.
The I.C.W.P.A.—In 1925 the International Class-War Prisoners’
Aid was started, a branch of another Russian organisation formed
in 1922 by the Komintern, under the leadership of Zinoviev and
known as the M.O.P.R., from the initials of the Russian words
Mejdunarodnoe Obshtchestvo Pomochi Rabochim, meaning
literally International Society for Help of Workers, but since in
Russian the words for workmen and for revolutionaries begin with
the same letter R—signifying to the initiated for the Help of
Revolutionaries. In fact, in the West of Europe no secret is made
of this double interpretation, and the M.O.P.R. is officially known
as the Secours Rouge International, and in England sometimes as
100 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
the International Red Aid. Here, however, it was judged prudent
to follow the precedent of Moscow by painting the words “ Inter­
national Workers’ Aid ” on the office door of the I.C.W.P.A.
The inauguration of the British branch is thus described in the
Daily Herald of January 8, 1925 :
“ A British branch of the ‘ International Class-War Prisoners’ Aid ’
has been started a t 10 Fetter-lane, London, E.C.4.
“ The secretary, W. Hannington, in announcing the formation,
says :
“ ‘ I t is the British section of the International Class-War Prisoners’
Aid th a t was started in 1922, arising out of the wholesale and terrible
persecution of the active fighters of the working class in Germany,
Poland, Bulgaria, Italy, Rum ania, H ungary and Esthonia, and m any
of the British Colonies.’ ”
On the following day Wal Hannington, who, it will be remem­
bered, was also the leader of the N.U.W.C.M., gave the same account
in the Workers' Weekly and went on to say :
“ ‘ We have now established in G reat B ritain the British section
of the I.R .A ., which we shall call in this country the ‘ International
Class-War Prisoners’ Aid.’
“ The following will be the nature of its work :
“ (1) To spread am ongst the British workers information con­
cerning the capitalist persecution and tyranny against the workers in
all parts of the world.
“ (2) The propaganda to carry emphasis of the increasing need
for international working-class solidarity.
“ (3) To raise money to provide legal defence and financial assist­
ance to all class-war prisoners and their dependents.
“ (4) To organise campaigns for bringing pressure to bear upon
the Governments to release all those lying in jail because of their
working-class activities.”
By October 1925the members of the Committee of the I.C.W.P.A.
included the following :
Secretary : Wal Hannington.
Mrs. Helen Crawfurd Harry Pollitt
Tom Mann S. Saklatvala
A. Gossip J. D. Thom
Chaman Lai R. Stoker
Emile Burns Bob Lovell
Lajpat Rai
The last named has acted as secretary since the imprisonment of
Hannington in November 1925.
The press in this country constantly confuse the I.C.W.P.A.
and the W.I.R. It should.!, therefore, he carefully noted that the
I.C.W.P. A. is the British branch of the M.O.P.R., founded in
Moscow in 1922, and the W. I. R. is the British branch of the Meshrab-
pom. founded in Berlin in 1921. The two organisations are, therefore,
quite distinct, although both are directed by the Komintern. In
SUBSIDIARY COMMUNIST ORGANISATIONS 101
Russian, as we have shown, their names are almost identical. These
resemblances are probably intentional, being designed to create con­
fusion and lead the “ Capitalist press ” into committing blunders.
The S.C.R.—A more intellectual group, organised for the purpose
of co-operation with Moscow, is the “ Society for Cultural Relations
Between the Peoples of the British Commonwealth and the Union
of Socialist Soviet Republics,” founded in May 1924, and run by
Miss Llewelyn Davies of the Women’s Co-operative Guild and Mrs.
Catherine Rabinovitch, wife of Philip Rabinovitch of Arcos.
Amongst the principal supporters were the following :
H. Baillie-Weaver (Theosophical Society)
H. N. Brailsford
Fred Bramley
C. Roden Buxton
G. D. H. Cole
Dr. Robert Dunstan, I.L.P.
J. L. Garvin, editor of Observer
J. M. Keynes
Joseph King, I.L.P., 1917 Club
H. J. May
Bertrand Russell
G. Bernard Shaw
R. H. Tawney, Fabian Society
Miss Sybil Thorndike
Mrs. Sidney Webb
H. G. Wells
E. F. Wise
Mrs. Wise
Leonard Woolf
Michael S. Farbman
The offices of this society are at 23 Tavistock Square, and its
ostensible mission is to supply information about conditions of
life in Russia. Usefulness to Moscow is indicated by the following
description: “ The Communist International favours it (the
S.C.R.) as a fertile ground for Communist propaganda of the in­
tellectual variety.”
The first three of the above organisations are absolutely Com­
munist in aim, not under the direction of the British Communist
Party, but of Moscow. It will, therefore, be seen that in arresting the
leaders of the C.P.G.B. the Government was only interfering with
one section of the Communist organisation in this country. These
arrests were made as the result of a raid on the headquarters of the
C.P.G.B. in King Street in October 1925, and twelve members
of the Party—MacManus, Pollitt, Gallacher, Inkpin, Hannington,
Cant, Rust, Campbell, Wintringham, J. T. Murphy, T. Bell and Page
Arnot—were sentenced to short terms of imprisonment. These
men were not perhaps the most dangerous revolutionaries in this
102 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
country, who, though not—at any rate avowedly—members of
the C.P.G.B., belong either to the R.I.L.U., Minority Movement,
Trade Union Unity Movement or one of the organisations which
have been described.
It cannot be too strongly emphasised that a close connection
exists between all these, and at the same time between each and
Moscow, hence their activities are skilfully co-ordinated under a
central command. In this way joint demonstrations are frequently
organised by members of the different groups. Thus on March 29
of this year a meeting ending in disorderly scenes was organised
in Hyde Park by Bob Lovell of the I.C.W.P.A. and M. Prooth of
the N.U.W.C.M. Again we find agitation for the release of political
prisoners, carried out jointly by the I.C.W.P.A. and W.I.R. In
April speakers on Clapham Common at a demonstration for this
object included MacManus, C.P.G.B., Robert Stewart, C.P.G.B.
and W.I.R., Nat Watkins, R.I.L.U., George Hardy, Minority Move­
ment, H. N. Brailsford, I.L.P., whilst members of the S.C.R. con­
tributed to the funds of the I.C.W.P.A. for the release of men
imprisoned during the General Strike under the Emergency Powers
Act. The signatories to the appeal sent out for this purpose by
the I.C.W.P.A. included William Paul, Rutland Boughton, A. J.
Cook, Dr. Marion Phillips, Dr. Dunstan, George Lansbury and other
members of Parliament.
Left Wing Movements.—Another method adopted by the Com­
munists for camouflaging their activities is to form so-called “ Left
Wing Movements ” in the Labour Party, I.L.P. or trade union
groups. These have been organised all over the country, and serve
as rallying points for Communists who, particularly since the arrests
of last November, find it more politic not to describe themselves
as such, so as to remain within the Labour Party, which has officially
repudiated Communism. The organ of the movement is Left
Wing. In December of last year (1925) a circular was sent out
by the C.P.G.B. proposing the formation of a combined “ Left
Wing Group,” composed of all the members of the Labour Party
who had voted against the decision of the Liverpool Conference of
the Labour Party, to exclude the Communists. The moving spirit
behind this movement is said to be W. Paul, a member of the
C.P.G.B. Executive, whilst the secretary of the Greater London
group known as the “ Left Wing Provisional Committee ” is W. T.
Colyer, arrested in America in 1920 as a member of the American
Communist Party, who at the Liverpool Conference seconded the
resolution that “ the British Empire must be entirely smashed if
the workers of this country were to improve their conditions ”
(Daily Herald, October 1, 1925).
It is, therefore, easy to see how, by the simple device of not
registering as a member of the group in King Street, a man may
proclaim himself not to be a Communist whilst working as an active
agent of Communism under the direct control of Moscow.
CHAPTER XI
POST-WAR PACIFISM
In Chapter IV a survey was made of the Pacifist activities of
Socialists in England and America during the War. From an exam­
ination of the points there given, two important facts emerge :
namely, (1) That the same people who distinguished themselves in the
peace-at-any-price movement when this country was threatened by
a foreign foe were equally prominent in the war-at-any-price move­
ment directed against British industry and the prosperity of the
Empire after the international conflict had ended; (2) That the
concern displayed by our Pacifists for the interests of the foreigner
applied only to our enemies and never to our allies. The same
people who wept over the starving children of Germany or Russia
remained dry-eyed over the sufferings of the French and Belgian
children during the war and amidst their professions of love for
humanity were capable of giving vent to vitriolic sentiments with
regard to France. The intimate connection between pro-Germanism
and Bolshevism will thus be shown by incontrovertible evidence.
We shall now follow this double role of Pacifism since the War
ended.
Amongst the organisations active between 1914 and 1918, the
“ No Conscription Fellowship ” has ceased to exist; the rest have
continued their campaign, which since it is no longer a matter of
ensuring a triumph for Gorman arms, has been waged for the pur­
pose of enabling Germany to evade the payment of reparations, of
breaking our Entente with France, and of helping the restoration
of German industry by spreading discontent amongst our own
industrial workers.
The U.D.C.—Since the ending of the War, the subversive role of
the Union of Democratic Control has been made still more apparent
by its avowed connection with “ Clarte,” the International of
Socialist Intellectuals, founded in Paris in 1919, with headquarters
at 49 Rue de Bretagne, offices at 12 Rue Feydeau and a lodge at 279
Rue des Pyr6n6es under the jurisdiction of the Grand Orient of
France. The leader of this society was Henri Barbusse, author of
the defeatest novel Le Feu, and amongst prominent members
were Anatole France, Professor Aulard of the Sorbonne, Georges
Brandes, Madeleine Marx, Victor Cyril, Vaillant Couturier and a
number of prominent British Pacifists and Socialist writers.
“ Clart6,” being a secret society, does not enter into the scope of
this book, except in its relation to the U.D.C., which the latter has
103
104 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
now admitted, though without revealing the names of those British
members who are known from other sources of information to have
belonged to it.
Mrs. Philip Snowden, herself a leading member of the U.D.C.,
stated in reference to the “ Clarte ” group that “ their policy is very
much the same as that of the Union of Democratic Control in
England ” ( A Political Pilgrim in Europe, p. 129). This admission
throws a significant fight on the character of the U.D.C., in view of
the fact that “ Clarte ” ended by definitely joining up with the French
Communist Party (Mrs. H. M. Swanwick, Builders of Peace, p. 130).
Since 1924, however, “ Clarte ” appears to have ceased to exist,
though more probably it has only gone further underground and
continues to work under another name.
The U.D.C., however, is still going strong. In 1923 it published
a Manifesto on “ The State of Europe,” declaring that
the Versailles Treaty had “ created an impossible situation in
Europe,” and that the nation should “ insist upon dropping once
and for all the demand for Reparations.” This Manifesto was
signed on behalf of the Executive of the U.D.C. by Major C. R.
Attlee, Mary Hamilton, J. A. Hobson, E. D. Morel, Arthur Ponsonby,
F. J. Shaw, (Mrs.) H. M. Swanwick, H. B. Lees-Smith, Charles
Trevelyan and Hamilton Fyfe, the present editor of the Daily
Herald, which has always shown itself consistently pro-German.
E. D. Morel, as editor of the U.D.C. organ Foreign Affairs, until his
death in 1924 continued his work for Germany even to the point of
denouncing the Socialist Government of luke-warmness in the matter
of letting Germany off reparations (see article by W. Faulkner,
“ Morel & Co. Again ” in Patriot for July 31 and August 7, 1924).
The W.I.L.—The Women’s International League for Peace and
Freedom is still active. Its headquarters are now at Maison
Internationale, 12 Rue de Vieux College, Geneva, with Jane Addams
still as President and Miss Madeleine Doty as secretary.
The offices of the British section are at International House,
55 Gower Street, W.C.l, with, in 1925, an Executive Committee that
included the following :
President: Mrs. H. M. Swanwick.
Chairman : Miss K. D. Courtney.
Hon. National Secretary : Miss Mary Chick.
Hon. Foreign Relations Secretary : Dr. Hilda Clark.
Hon. Treasurer : The Lady Courtney of Penwith.
Hon. Assistant Treasurer : Mrs. Laurence Binyon.
Miss Margaret Ashton Lady Parmoor
Miss Adela Coit Dr. Ethel Williams
Miss Emily Leaf
The N.M.W.M.—Another Pacifist organisation that has been
active since 1919 is the No More War Movement (known until
recently as the No More War Committee), an offshot of the now
POST-WAR PACIFISM 105
defunct No Conscription Fellowship, which joined up with the
“ War Resisters’ International,” formed by various Resisters’
groups in France, Holland, Germany, America, Austria, Scandi­
navia, Bulgaria, Czecho-Slovakia, Switzerland, Australia, New
Zealand, etc.
The Constitution of the N.M.W.M. is officially given as follows :
“ The M ovement shall be known as the No More W ar Movement,
being the British Section of the W ar Resisters’ International.
“ The object of the Movement shall be to m ake the idea of personal
resistance to W ar, by refusal to assist in any way in arm ed conflict,
the backbone of every m ovem ent towards W orld Peace and Universal
Brotherhood. Together with this purpose, the Movement seeks to
assist in removing the causes of W ar and in building a new social order
based on N ational and International co-operation for the common good.
“ Membership shall be open to all who sign the Declaration.
“ T H E DECLARATION
“ Believing th a t all war is wrong, and th a t the arm ing of nations,
whether by sea, land, or air, is treason to the spiritual unity and
intelligence of mankind, I declare it to be m y intention never to take
p art in war, offensive or defensive, international or civil, whether by
bearing arms, making or handling munitions, voluntarily subscribing
to war loans, or using m y labour for the purpose of setting others free
for war service. Further, I declare m y intention to strive for the
removal of all causes of war and to work for the establishm ent of a
new social order based on co-operation for the common good.”
In 1925 the personnel of the N.M.W.M. was composed of the
following :
Chairman : George Lansbury, M.P.
Treasurer : Harold J. Morland.
Financial Secretary : Ida J. Tinkler.
Press Sec. and Editor : No More War, W. J. Chamberlain.
Secretary : Beatrice C. M. Brown.
Organising Secretary : Lucy A. Cox.
Executive
Bertram Appleby
Walter Ayles
Harold F. Bing
A. Fenner Brockway
H. Runham Brown
J. Theodore Harris
Marguerite Louis
Committee
Margaret Newboult
Helen Peile
A. Noel Simpson
E. V. Watering
Wilfred WeUcock
Theodora Wilson Wilson
The offices of the N.M.W.M., which were at 304 High Holbom,
have recently been changed to 11 Doughty Street, W.C.l.
There is also a Youth Section, of which the secretary is Phyllis
Bing, 6 Alton Road, Croydon. The organ of the Movement
No More War appears monthly.
106 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Fellowship of Reconciliation.—The No More War demonstra­
tions that take place from time to time all over the country appear
not to be organised directly by the N.M.W.M., but by the Fellow­
ship of Reconciliation working in collaboration with the N.M.W.M.
The origins of the F.O.R. have been given earlier (see p. 35),
but since the War it has been organised on a larger scale, and now
calls itself in England the “ International Fellowship of Recon­
ciliation ” ; in France, “ La Reconciliation,” and in Germany the
“ Versohnungsbund,” with the further title of a “ Movement
Towards a Christian International.”
The International Secretariat is at 16 Red Lion Square, London,
W.C.l. The General Secretary is the Rev. Oliver Dryer and the
Assistant Secretary Miss M. L. Moll.
At a Conference held in Holland in 1920 the so-called “ Christian
International ” thus formulated its declaration of faith :
“ We believe th a t it is our F ather’s will th a t the present social
order should cease, and be replaced by a new order wherein the means
of production will be used to supply the sim ple needs of all mankind.
Under a system of private capitalism this seems to us impossible.”
The International Peace Society.—Another international Pacifist
organisation is the Peace Society, dating from 1816, of which the
origins were given in Chapter IV of this book (see p. 32), and which
is now described as the International Peace Society, with Continental
headquarters at 38 Avenue Marceau, Courbevoie, Paris.
The objects of the Society are stated to be :
“ To diffuse inform ation tending to show th a t w ar is inconsistent
with the spirit of Christianity and the true interests of m ankind ; and
to point out the means best calculated to m aintain perm anent and
universal Peace, upon the basis of Christian principles.”
The British headquarters are at King’s Buildings, Dean Stanley
Street, Westminster, S.W.I., and its personnel is as follows :
President: E. T. John.
Vice-Presidents
Treasurer : Jonathan Edward Hodgkin.
Director and Secretary : Rev. Herbert Dunnico, J.P., M.P., C.C.
The Bishop of Ripon
The Bishop of Truro.
The Suffragan Bishop of Ply-
Rev. RobertF. Horton, M.A., D.D.
Rev. John Hutton, D.D.
Sir Donald Maclean.
T. P. O’Connor, M.P.
Miss P. H. Peckover.
Rev. Thomas Phillips, B.A.
Sir John Simon, M.P.
Philip Snowden, M.P.
The Chief Rabbi.
The Canon of Westminster
Abbey.
mouth.
Lord Ashton.
Lord Shaw.
Lord H. Cavendish-Bentinck.
Barrow Cadbury.
Sir W. H. Dickinson.
T. R. Ferens.
Lord Emmott.
POST-WAR PACIFISM 107
Executive Committee
A. Kemp Brown, M.A.
Rev. Humphrey Chalmers, M.A.
Miss M. Evans.
Hubert A. GiU, M.A.
Thos. Groves, M.P.
J. J. Hayward, M.A.
David Hunter, O.B.E.
Rev. W. Long.
The Hon. Mrs. J. Doyle Penrose.
Rev. T. Phillips, B.A.
T. Richardson.
R. Simpson.
Ben Spoor, M.P.
Walter Windsor, M.P.
W. Wright, M.P.
Morgan Jones, M.P.
The organ of the Peace Society is The Herald of Peace.
Two offshoots of the Peace Society are :
The United Peace Fellowship—Peace Scouts.—The United Peace
Fellowship of the Churches, also under the Rev. H. Dunnico, with
headquarters at 47 New Broad Street, E.C.2, and the International
Peace Scouts, formed in February 1923, as an amalgamation of the
“ Band of Peace Union,” the “ Crusaders of Peace ” and the London
section of the “ British Boys’ and Girls’Peace Scouts.” The Presi­
dent is again the Rev. H. Dunnico and the Vice-Presidents :
A. Barnes, M.P. Alderman Ben Turner, M.P.
Thomas Groves, M.P. W. Windsor, M.P.
George Lansbury, M.P. W. Wright, M.P.
The National Council for the Prevention of War.—The National
Council for the Prevention of War was formerly the National
Peace Council referred to in Chapter IV (see p. 32) and changed its
name in 1925. It is described as “ a federation of organisations
working against war.”
The official declaration of principles is as follows :
“ The Council does not seek to take over the work of any existing
organisation working against war, b u t desires to strengthen the work
of each organisation by the co-ordination of all.
“ G e n e r a l O b j e c t s
“ (a) To promote, organise, co-ordinate and m ake effective public
opinion in favour of, and efforts for, the prevention of w ar and the
developm ent of international goodwill and co-operation ;
“ (6) To co-operate w ith other organisations or bodies in the inter­
national peace m ovem ent;
“ (c) To secure in the schools and colleges an education for in ter­
national friendship and understanding ;
“ (d) To take all such steps as m ay, in the opinion of the Council,
be necessary or desirable to give effect to the above purposes.
“ I m m e d ia t e A i m s
“ (a) Progressive revision of the Peace Treaties ;
“ (6) Im m ediate and progressive Reduction of Arm aments by
International Agreement ;
“ (c) Support and extension of the work of the League of N ations.”
The Executive is composed of the following :
108 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
President: Earl Beauchamp, K.G.
Ex-President: The Lady Parmoor.
Chairman : Mr. Oswald Mosley, L.P.
Treasurers : Mrs. George Cadbury, M.A., C.B.E.
Mr. F. C. Linfield.
Directing Secretary : Mr. J. H. Hudson, M.A., M.P.
Publication Secretary : Mr. Norman Angell.
The offices of the Council are at Millbank House, 2 Wood Street,
S.W.l.
Some of the principal people who have associated themselves
with the work of the National Council are : Major C. R. Attlee,
M.P., the Bishop of Birmingham, J. R. Clynes, M.P., the Rev. H.
Dunnico, M.P. (director of the Peace Society), Sir William Goode,
Arthur Henderson, M.P., J. A. Hobson, M.A. (U.D.C.), E. T. John
(President of the Peace Society), George Lansbury, M.P. (Chairman
of the No More War Movement), the Bishop of Manchester,
Professor Gilbert Murray, L.N.U., the Rev. Thomas Nightingale,
Lord and Lady Parmoor, Philip Snowden, M.P. (U.D.C.), Mrs. Philip
Snowden (U.D.C.), Mrs. H. M. Swanwick, M.S. (President of the
W.I.L.), Charles Trevelyan, M.P. (U.D.C.), and the late H. Baillie
Weaver.
Thirty or forty organisations are now affiliated to the Council.
The chief are :
The National Free Church Council.
The National Brotherhood Council.
The Co-operative Union (with 4,000,000 members).
The Women’s International League.
The Women’s Co-operative Guild.
The Iron and Steel Trades’ Confederation.
The National Reform Union.
Co-operative Holidays’ Association.
The Cobden Club.
The No More War Movement.
The Friends’ Peace Committee.
The Union of Democratic Control.
The Church of England Peace League.
The National Association of Schoolmasters.
The National Council for the Prevention of War has a working
agreement with the League of Nations Union by which Professor
Gilbert Murray, Chairman of the L.N.U., sat on the Executive
Committee of the Council, and Baillie Weaver, member of the
Council, sat on the Executive Committee of the Union.
The L.N.U.—The League of Nations Union, founded on October
POST-WAR PACIFISM 109
13, 1918, comprises a strange assortment of people, ranging from
orthodox Conservatives to revolutionary Socialists, united by the
aim “ to secure the whole-hearted acceptance by the British people
of the League of Nations.” The agreement to sink party differences
in this common cause seems, however, to work out in a somewhat
one-sided manner, as described in a communication to the
Patriot :
“ There are speakers of all shades of this political belief on their
lists. B ut there is the difference in their attitude th a t Conservatives
who speak on behalf of th a t body drop their p arty creed and stake
their all on the League. The Socialist Wing, however, do not drop
their own pet theories ; they find themselves in their elem ent prating
about Internationalism and W orld Brotherhood, and m aking gibes at
patriotism ” (Patriot, February 21, 1924).
The writer goes on to quote the instance of an L.N.U. speaker
in Glasgow, who proclaimed himself a strong adherent of the Labour
Party, attacked France and urged the restoration of Germany’s
possessions in East Africa. There seems, therefore, some ground
for the opinion held in certain quarters that the L.N.U. “ is rapidly
degenerating into a pro-German society ” (Daily Mail, March 13,
1926).
Such are the principal Peace Societies, which have been active
in this country since the W ar; besides those described above
may be mentioned the Women’s Union for Peace, the Arbitrate
First Bureau, the Friends’ Council for International Service
(Secretary, Carl Heath of the National Peace Council), the Society
of Friends’Peace Committee, the Jewish Peace Society, the League
to Abolish War, etc.
It is now time to turn to America, and follow the connection
between the Pacifist groups described in Chapter IV and the
Bolshevist movement.
People’s Council of America.—At the point where this account
broke off, the “ First American Conference of Democracy and
Terms of Peace ” had declared itself in sympathy with the “ Russian
Council of Workmen and Soldiers,” formed under Kerensky (see
p. 38) and on p. 54 another group was mentioned, the “ People’s
Council of America,” formed in June 1917 after the Russian model.
Amongst the members of the latter organisation were again the
leading Pacifists—Emily Green Balch, Morris Hillquit, the Rabbi
Magnes, Louis Lochner, Rebecca Shelly, Joseph Schlossberg, etc.
People’s Freedom Union.—This was absorbed after the signing
of the Armistice by the “ People’s Freedom Union,” under Charles
Recht, a lawyer, later on legal adviser to Ludwig Martens, a German
subject, who was afterwards appointed by the Bolsheviks the
representative of Russia in the United States (Lusk Report, p. 641),
but finally deported.
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom.—The
110 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Pacifists now set about organising a further peace demonstration,
and in May 1919 the Women’s International Committee for Per­
manent Peace held an International Conference at Zurich, when
the name of the organisation was changed to the Women’s Inter­
national League for Peace and Freedom. Jane Addams, who had
again come over from the United States, was elected International
President, with Emily Green Balch as secretary.
An interesting light is thrown on the leadership of the W.I.L.
in America, in the report presented to the United States Congress
on the subversive activities of the American Civil Liberties Union
in 1925 :
“ On the A.C.L.U. com mittee we also find the three chief leaders
of the W omen’s International League for Peace and Freedom, which
is endeavouring to prepare the w ay for the com m unist uprising by
bringing about complete disarm am ent of the country. They are
Sophonisba P. Breckenridge ; Agnes Brown Leach, wife of Henry
Goddard Leach, of the pink Forum ; and Jane Addams. Miss Addams,
w ith anarchist Berkm an’s friend, F rank P. W alsh, was in February,
1920, one of the Vice-Presidents of the Public Ownership League, in
association w ith Glenn E. Plum b, Frederic C. Howe, J. L. Engdahl,
etc. She'was listed as a stockbroker in the Russian-American Industrial
Corporation, w ith Lenin, Debs, and others. She is a m em ber of the
Fellowship of Reconciliation. A t a dinner given by the Fellowship
of Reconciliation on June 9 in California specimen guests were repre­
sentatives of the Communist Federated Press, members of the Industrial
W orkers of the World and com munist workers, a leader of the Young
Communist Internationale, a director of the local American Civil
Liberties Union branch, and an attorney for com munists and Industrial
W orkers of the World. A t another m eeting a member, after praising
Miss Addams, announced th a t she would never be patriotic until she
gained the com munist ends she strove for.”
American Civil Liberties Union.—The most important Bolshevist-
Pacifist organisation in the United States, since the rise of the
Soviet regime, is the “ American Civil Liberties Union,” a reorganisa­
tion of the National Civil Liberties Bureau, into which were merged
a number of the preceding Pacifist bodies—the American League
to Limit Armaments, the American Union Against Militarism, the
People’s Freedom Union, the Emergency Peace Federation, etc.
This new body came into existence on January 12, 1920, with
Roger Baldwin, a notorious Pacifist and “ an old hanger-on of the
Berkman Anarchist gang,” as its director (Congressional Record
for December 19, 1925, p. 3).
On its Committee were found, besides the leaders of the
Pacifist societies mentioned above—Jane Addams, Rabbi Magnes,
Sophonisba P. Breckenridge, Agnes Brown Leach, Morris Hillquit,
representative of the Soviet Bureau, etc., Elizabeth Gurley Flynn,
an I.W.W. agitator—avowed revolutionaries such as William
Z. Foster (of the T.U.E.L.), James H. Maurer, friend, aider
and abettor of Anarchists and Communists, and Norman Hapgood
of the Hearst Press.
At a Congress of the United States Senate last December (1925),
the poisonous activities of this organisation were fully revealed in
the course of a communication from Francis Ralston Welsh, in
whichit was stated that the A.C.L.U.—which should have been called
the Unamerican Criminal Licence Union, had consistently sup­
ported Communists, murderers, dynamiters and other criminals.
National Council for the Prevention of War.—The American
organisation, known as the National Council for the Prevention of
War, was formed in about 1921, some years before the National
Peace Council in England adopted this name. It is not clear if
there is any connection between the two societies. The American
one, which was formerly the National Council for the Reduction
of Armaments, was reorganised by Frederick J. Libby, a notorious
Pacifist, who, on the call to arms when America joined the war,
hastily became a Quaker, and secured safe employment in ad­
ministering relief (Marvin, op. tit., p. 59). By means of this
organisation, which has been described as “ virtually a Communist
affair ” (Congressional Record, “ Recognition of Russia,” 1924, p. 5),
affiliation and co-operation were brought about with a large number
of societies and individuals, the openly acknowledged purpose
of which is to undermine the loyalty of American citizens (Marvin,
op. tit., p. 59). A Woman’s Joint Congressional Committee was
formed to bring in women’s movements, such as the National
League of Women Voters, the Women’s Committee for World
Disarmament and the Women’s International League for Peace
and Freedom, of which the National Chairman in America was
Mrs. George T. Odell.
The societies that have now been enumerated are only a few,
but the most important, of the countless Pacifist groups working
in this country and America—the list could be enormously extended.
In reviewing this vast network of Pacifist organisation, in which one
finds the same people figuring again and again, one is inevitably
brought to inquire why all these separate societies apparently
working for the same end continue to exist. Whence comes the
money to finance these innumerable offices, secretaries and publica­
tions ? The answer is surely that since, in the words of Mr. Fred A.
Marvin, “ Pacifism is but a name given to one form of action to
create world Communism and Socialism ” (Ye Shall Know the
Truth, p. 50), the organisation of both is carried out on the same
principle—that of forming a ramification of groups which by their
number elude observation and by the slightly differing shades of
redness appeal to people of all kinds, ranging from mild visionaries
to the advocates of forcible revolution. The great fault we have to
find with our Socialist-Pacifists is that they are not really out for
peace at all. From Marx’s “ iron battalions of the proletariat ”
to the words of the “ Red Flag,” the language particularly affected
POST-WAR PACIFISM 111
112 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
by the Socialists who vaunt the blessings of peace has always
held a strong military flavour. Not only do these opponents of
war between nations and professed advocates of arbitration demand
that there should be no “ truce with Capitalism” and no arbitration
between employers and employed, but even the ordinary machinery
of war inspires them with no indignation, provided it is manipulated
by the two most military nations of the world to-day. Neither the
ruthless legions of Imperial Germany nor the red troops of Soviet
Russia, but only the simple and kindly soldiery of Britain, France,
Belgium and America have been the objects of their denunciations.
Indeed, our Socialists, on their visits to Bolshevia, have been known
to address hearty congratulations to the troops, whilst George
Lansbury, Chairman of the “ No More War Movement,” has
declared : “ The war-cry of the Red Army is ‘Freedom for All!'
We in England must take our stand with them !”
It is this obvious inconsistency which distinguishes the anti­
patriots we know as Pacifists from the sincere seekers after world
peace.
CHAPTER XII
YOUTH MOVEMENTS
The earliest attempt made by Socialists to gain influence over the
minds of the youth of this country was the Socialist Sunday School
Movement, started by members of the S.D.F. In Justice of May 16,
1891, A. A. Watts wrote a letter to the Editor saying : “ I throw
out as a suggestion for our members and our Executive the formation
of Socialist Sunday Schools.”
The idea was carried out in the following year, and in November
1892 the first Sunday School was started in Battersea, with two
scholars ; these increased to eighty-six in the course of the next
two years.
In the issue of Justice for February 10, 1894, a letter appeared
under the heading of “ Save the Children,” signed by Charles R.
Vincent (Canning Town), Mary Grey (Battersea) and T. Partridge
(Walworth), saying : “ We have agreed to the following resolution
as the best means to save the children from the prevailing ignorance
and superstition :
“ ‘That we endeavour during 1894 to establish a Sunday School
Union in connection with the S.D.F.’ ”
In the same month J. Watts, Treasurer and Hon. Secretary of
the British Socialist Sunday School Committee, wrote that a Com­
mittee had been appointed by the Bristol Socialist Sunday Society
for the pin-pose of forming a Sunday School in that city.
The Battersea Sunday School seems to have proved highly
successful, for in the issue of Justice for September 8, 1894, Mary
Grey wrote to say that the children had been taken for a picnic to
Kenley, and that “ coming home theysang all theway, and repeatedly
called : ‘Three cheers for the social revolution ! ’ ” The move­
ment developed largely under the influence of A. P. Hazell, of the
S.D.F., and Archibald Russell, who edited the official organ, The
Young Socialist.
In this same year of 1894 a certain Tom Anderson founded the
first of the Glasgow Socialist Sunday Schools, but these were taken
over in 1906 by the National Council of the British Socialist Sunday
School Union, which does not inculcate the blasphemous and violent
teaching of Tom Anderson, continued later in his Proletarian schools.
The attitude of the Socialist Sunday Schools towards religion—in
contradistinction to that of the Proletarian and also the Corn-
113
114 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
munist Schools, which will be dealt with later—was described in
1923 by Stanley Mayne, formerly General Secretary to the National
Council, in the words : “ Within the Socialist Sunday School
Movement we have opinion ranging from atheist and agnostic
over the whole gamut of the Christian Church.” Owing to the dis­
inclination of the S.S.S. and the Communist Party—with which
Mayne appears to have sympathised—to unite, he resigned his
post a few months later. The question of religion was perhaps more
concisely put last year at a Conference of the S.S.S. in London,
by Councillor R. Chandler, of West Ham, who was reported as
saying :
“ The Socialist Sunday School movement is not opposed to religion,
neither are we supporting it ; we are merely cutting it out. Our
Socialist movement is greater than any religion, its ideals are greater
than Christ or greater even than God, and we want to bring about a
universal brotherhood” (Patriot for February 26, 1925).
Precisely by their appearance of moderation and professions
of idealism—derided by the Bolsheviks—the Socialist Sunday
Schools are more insidious than the openly revolutionary and
atheistic variety. They have always borne a noticeably German
character ; the hymn-books used contain a number of German
names over the words or tunes. The air of the “ Red Flag ” is,
of course, that of the old folk-song, “ O ! Tannenbaum, o, Tannen-
baum, wie schon sind deine Blatter.” The same German inspiration
may be observed throughout the Continental Youth Movement, of
which it is now necessary to trace the origins.
In 1900 a Congress of the 2nd Internationale, which, as we have
seen, had passed completely under the control of the German
Social Democrats, took place in Paris, and the plan of organising a
more systematic Socialist Youth movement was put forward but
not immediately organised on an international basis. Isolated
groups were soon formed, however: the first in Holland by some
members of the Social Democratic Labour Party (S.D.A.P.) and
named “ De Zaaler ” (the Sowers); others followed in Sweden (1903),
in Denmark, Finland and Spain (1906), in Norway and Italy
(1907) (Armia Kommunistitcheskovo Intemazionala, published by
the 3rd Internationale in 1921, pp. 91-6).
International of Socialist Youth.—In this same year of 1907 the
movement was at last internationally organised in Germany, and
the “ International Relations Committee of the Socialist Youth
Organisations,” briefly known as the “ Internationale of Socialist
Youth,” at first completely revolutionary in character, was founded
during the International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart. The
leaders were Karl Liebknecht, Rolland Holst and Alber. In 1910
the more moderate Socialists succeeded in obtaining an influence,
but in 1915 further attempts were made to turn the movement in
a revolutionary direction. Its organ, The International of Youth,
continued publication throughout the War.
Young Communist International.—After the War and the
Russian Revolution, on November 20-29, 1919, the Left elements
of this organisation held an International Conference in Berlin,
and took the name of the “ Communist Youth International ” or
“ Young Communist International,” which proceeded to affiliate
itself with the 3rd Internationale (Labour Year Book, 1924, pp. 381,
388).
It was from the headquarters of the Communist Youth Inter­
national at 63 Feurigstrasse, Berlin, that the publications of the
Communist Youth movement continued to be sent out in different
languages. These included the following, the first of which, it
will be noted, retained the old name of the Socialist Youth organ :
Jugend-Internationale (monthly), translated into English as
The Young International, later as The International Youth.
Internationale Jugendkorrespondenz (every ten days).
For children :
Der junge Genoese (The Young Comrade).
Das Proletarische Kind (The Proletarian Child).
The English translation of the last named (printed in Berlin)
was sold in Glasgow under the title of An International Magazine for
Proletarian Children. Amongst the contributors were the editor,
E. Hornle, and such names as Max Barthel, Morris Rosenfeld, Leo
Andreas, Hella Rosenblum, etc.
Besides this literature printed in Berlin, each country had its
own organs printed and published at home under the inspiration
of Berlin and Moscow. Some of these were as follows :
England : The Young Worker (weekly).
The Red Dawn (monthly).
France : L’Avant Garde Communiste et Ouvri&re.
Holland : Der jonge Communist.
Switzerland : Die Neue Jugend.
Italy : Avanguardia.
United States : The Young Communist (illegal).
Russia : Youni Kommunist.
Youni Proletar.
Norway : Klassekampen.
Austria : Die Kommunistische Jugend, etc.
Young Communist League.—The result of the first (Berlin)
Congress of the Communist Youth International was to create
Communist Leagues of Youth in a number of different countries,
and when the second Congress met in Moscow from July 9 to 20,
1920, the representatives of these leagues from no less than forty
countries were present (Internazionale \Molodyeji, No. 12, 1921,
p. 6). An important centre of direction was now created in Moscow
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 115
116 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
by the Russian section of the movement, under the control of the
Komintem, which came to be called the “ Komsomol ” from the
Russian words Kommunistitcheski Soyuz Molodyeji, meaning Com­
munist League of Youth. The members of the Central Committee
in Moscow included Lazar Shatzkin (on the Berlin Executive Com­
mittee), Ignat, Plasunov, Smarodin and Fei'gin. A later develop­
ment of the Komsomol was the “ Young Pioneers.”
The Young Communist Leagues now formed in the different
countries were thus not branches of the Komsomol of Moscow
but of the Young Communist International of Berlin—known in
Russia as the Kim (Kommunistitcheski Internazional Molodyeje)—
affiliated to the Komintem of Moscow. At the same time, all these
Young Communist Leagues, being directed by the Communist
Parties in the countries to which they belonged, and the Communist
Party of each country being affiliated with the Komintem, they were
also connected with the latter, and were, therefore, under the double
control of Berlin and Moscow.
Before the foundation of the British Y.C.L. in 1921 the Com­
munist Youth movement in this country was represented by three
bodies. These were: (1) The Young Socialist League, which
joined up with the Young Communist International after the Berlin
Congress in 1919 (Communist International, No. 13, p. 2617). The
organ of the Y.S.L. was the Red Flag, edited by Nathan B. Whycer,
a teacher in the Central London Socialist Sunday School, and a
frequenter of the “ Brotherhood Church ” in North London which
was started before the War, and where the speakers have included
Saklatvala, Sylvia Pankhurst, and P. H. Lewis, the Communist who
is frequently heard in Hyde Park. (2) The Young Workers’ League,
with its organ, The Young Worker; and (3) the International
Communist School Movement, with the Red Dawn. In 1921 the
last two were merged into the Y.C.L., and their organs combined
in the Young Communist, with the sub-heading, “ Organ of the
Young Communist League : British Section of the Young Com­
munist International.” The first number, dated December 1921,
Btates :
“ W ith the birth of the Young Communist League, as the result
of the fusion of the Young W orkers’ League and the International
Communist School movement, and with it the first issue of The Young
Communist (with which is incorporated The Young Worker and The
Red Dawn), an epoch is m arked in the history of the Young Proletarian
m ovement in this country.”
On another page the Y.C.L. of Russia is described as the “ largest
league within the Young Communist International,” hence it is
clear that the Y.C.L.s of England and Russia were both a part
of the Berlin organisation, which remained in that city until 1924
(see Labour Year Book for 1924, p. 475), when it seems to have been
moved to Moscow. The Bulletins of the Young Communist League,
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 117
the Young Communist Review and International Youth, now appear
to be out of circulation in this country.
The headquarters of the Young Communist League of Great
Britain were at first the same as those of the Communist Party—
16 King Street, Covent Garden—and the editor both of the Young
Communist and another paper, the Young Rebel, was James Stewart,
of the Y.C.L. Executive (see Labour Who’s Who under his name).
Later the headquarters were removed to 36 Lamb’s Conduit Street,
with S. Goldsmith as editor of the Young Communist, and finally
to 38 Great Ormonde Street, the same address as the National
Minority Movement, where they are at the present moment. About
two years ago the Young Communist changed its name to the
Young Worker, reverting to that of the organ of the former Young
Workers’ League, and now appears weekly. The Y.C.L. has also
formed a children’s branch, called the Young Comrades’ League
for boys and girls between the ages of ten and fourteen, of which
the organ is the Young Comrade (monthly).
The National Executive Council of the Y.C.L. was not properly
constituted until 1922, when the following were elected :
H. Young
S. Goldsmith
Ruskin
Shaw
McDermott
Ballantyne
Ramsay
Redfem (Secretary)
In 1925 the National Executive Committee was constituted
as follows:
National Secretary : Frank D.
Young Comrades’ League).
Secretary : William Rust.
D. Wilson
J. Cohen
W. Tapsell
A. Pearce
E. Rothstein
W. Duncan
E. Woolley
Springhall (also leader of the
H. Smith
J. Robertson
J. Prothero
J. Shields
H. Young
C. M. Roebuck
In the following November (1925) Rust was amongst the Com­
munists imprisoned for sedition, and in May Springhall was con­
victed under the Emergency Powers Act brought into force during
the General Strike, and sentenced to hard labour.
The work of organising the Communist Sunday Schools, which
has been going on since 1920—some of which in 1925 took over the
name of Young Pioneers in imitation of Soviet Russia—has been
carried on by the Y.C.L. These schools were said to have ceased
to exist. This was not the case, at any rate in 1925, when forty
were still in existence, mostly held in cinemas or laundries, where
sex teaching of the most demoralising kind was given. The
118 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
teachers were in almost all cases aliens. Admittance was very
difficult to obtain, as were the Red Catechisms and other pamphlets
provided; one of the worst of these, entitled Communist Rules,
was published in 1921.
The Proletarian Schools, organised in 1918 by Tom Anderson
(formerly of the Socialist Sunday School Movement), are confined
to Glasgow and the surrounding neighbourhood (N.C.U. pamphlet,
The Truth about the Red Schools, p. 10). Their organ is a singularly
blasphemous and indecent publication named Proletcult: “ a
magazine for Girls and Boys.”
The attention of the clergy has frequently been drawn to these
centres for the corruption of youth with little result, and the only
attempt to draw the children away from them by opposition
schools has been made by the British Fascists' “ Children’s Clubs,”
providing counter-attractions in the form of wholesome amuse­
ment and simple teaching on religion and patriotism.
But the Socialist and Communist Sunday Schools are not the
most important poison-centres, since parents are not obliged to
send their children to them. For working-class youth the Socialist
and Communist teachers in the Government schools at which
attendance is compulsory are a greater danger, for in these it is
the best types of working-class children they are able to pervert.
But here again apparently no general action is to be taken.
The Young Socialist International.—We have seen that at the
Conference of the International of Socialist Youth in Berlin in 1919
only a section of the movement constituted itself the Young Com­
munist International, the remainder continued to disassociate
themselves from the Communist movement.
The International of Working-Class Youth.—Early in 1921 the
Social Democratic Young Workers’ International was formed in
Amsterdam by members of the parties attached to the 2nd Inter­
nationale, and at about the same time the Young Workers of
Austria, the German districts of Czecho-Slovakia, etc., organised
the International Union of Socialist Workers. These two Young
Socialist Internationals held a number of Conferences, and finally,
at Hamburg during the Session of the Labour Socialist or 2nd Inter­
nationale in 1923, a new Young Socialist International was formed,
called the “ Internationale of Working-Class Youth ” or Sozialistische
Jugend Internationale, under E. Ollenhauer, with headquarters at
3 Lindenstrasse, Berlin (Labour Year Book for 1924, pp. 381, 382,
475, and for 1925, p. 41). This organisation has made considerable
progress, and has a membership in twenty-two different countries,
by far the largest being in Germany, where it now amounts to
102,000 (Labour Year Book for 1926, pp. 381, 382). In Great
Britain the figure of 5,000 given is drawn entirely from the I.L.P.
I.L.P. Guild of Youth.—Early in 1924 the I.L.P., true to its
traditions in seeking inspiration from Germany, started to organise
the “ I.L.P. Guild of Youth” for bringing more young people into
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 119
the Socialist and Pacifist fold. By the end of the year a large
number of branches had been formed all over the country. The
question of forming a “ united front ” with the Young Communist
League has recently been discussed, but decided against by the
National Committee of the Guild. A contingent of “ comrades,”
headed by Arthur Tetley, a member of the National Committee,
attended the 2nd Congress of the Socialist Youth International at
Amsterdam from May 26-29, at which Eric Ollenhauer of the
Berlin headquarters took the lead. The I.L.P. Guild of Youth is
now affiliated to the “ British League of Esperanto Socialists,” in
which a number of Communists are also concerned.
The official organ of the Guild is The Flame, edited by Clare
Brockway, and published at 14 Great George Street, Westminster.
Like the Socialist Sunday Schools, the I.L.P. Guild of Youth is
not avowedly revolutionary or anti-Christian, but carries on its
campaign under the guise of Pacifism, brotherhood or the return to
nature.
The Fellowship of Youth for Peace.—We have already referred
both here and in America, to the “ International Fellowship of
Reconciliation ” or “ Versohnungsbund,” of which the International
Secretariat is situated in this country, under the control of the Rev.
Oliver Dryer, with offices at 16 Red Lion Square, whilst the
national branch is conducted by P. W. Bartlett, with offices next
door at No. 17. This organisation in America was instrumental
in forming the “ Fellowship of Youth for Peace ” early in 1924, as
part of the War Resisters’ International, with which the F.O.R. is
affiliated. From September 18-22, 1924, a joint conference of the
F.O.R. and the F.Y. for P. was held at Seaside Park, New Jersey,
and amongst members then elected to the council of the new move­
ment were a number of members of the American Civil Liberties
Union, including Roger Baldwin, A. J. Muste and John Haynes
Holmes, of which the subversive aims have been described earlier,
whilst several members of the W.I.L. were present as speakers.
Mrs. Margaret B. L. Robinson, an ardent patriot, president of the
Massachusetts Public Interests League, wrote on May 6, 1925 :
“ A m ovem ent which is showing itself to be full of danger in
Massachusetts is the so-called Fellowship of Youth for Peace. A t a
meeting held under its auspices last week in Boston, which I attended,
the presiding officer was a well-known Socialist, H arry D ana, and the
speaker a Belgian Socialist, Gust Muyne. Three tim es during the
evening the audience was urged to attend a ball for the benefit of
Sacco and V anzetti ” (Fred Marvin, Ye Shall Know the Truth, p. 66).
In the summer of 1925 William Q. Harrison and another
delegate sailed for England, and a meeting was arranged for July 1
by the F.O.R. at its international headquarters, 16 Red Lion
Square, at which he was to speak on “ the American Youth Move­
ment and its relation to the International Youth Movement.”
120 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Another meeting took place on the 9th of the same month at
the Friends’ Meeting House, 136 Bishopsgate, to welcome the two
Youth Movement delegates from America. This was convened
by the “ Federation of British Youth Movements,” of which we
shall now trace the origins in Germany.
The International League of Youth.—As we have seen, the
Socialist Youth Internationale existed in Germany before the War.
Just after the War had ended a Pacifist Youth Internationale, named
the “ International League of Youth,” was formed by a Dane,
Hermod Lannung, and the aims of the League, drawn up at a pre­
liminary conference in Copenhagen and confirmed in 1922 at a
further conference in Hamburg, were set forth as follows :
“ The aim of the International League of Y outh is to awaken
Y outh to the inherent unity of the peoples of the world, and to make
future w ar impossible by a fellowship based on tru st and friendship.
“ In the m eantim e, believing in the principle of compulsory arbitra­
tion, the League advocates the lim itation of arm am ents, with a view
to their ultim ate abolition, and the substitution of an International
Police Force for the present National M ilitary System. I t will do all
in its power to further the establishm ent of a true League of Nations.
“ To further this aim the British section has consented to act as
a central International Bureau for Y outh of all nations. I t will collect
and disseminate reports as to the activities of all Youth Movements
federated to the International League of Youth, and will publish a
three-m onthly report in this magazine.” (Youth, Spring 1924.)
The Central International Bureau, formed by the British Section,
was located at 152 Abbey House, Westminster, under the direction
of Miss Moya Jow itt; the official organ of the movement being
Youth (quarterly), edited by Rolf Gardiner of St. John’s College,
Cambridge, and circulated by the headquarters in Abbey House,
and also by the German agent of the League, Hans Seligo, in Leipzig.
According to the account given in Youth for the spring of 1924,
the International League of Youth was organised in the following
manner.
A number of members of the leaders’ council who had been
present at a great International Youth meeting at Hellerau in
August 1923, afterwards met at the castle of Lauenstein and formed
a circle known as the Lauensteiner Kreis, in order to engage in “ a
common search and discovery of new ways and means in the
technique of Western politics, economics, education, art and science.”
For this purpose four “ watch-towers ” were created, from which
observations could be carried out—the first at Berlin, for com­
munication with the East and especially with Soviet Russia;
the second at the Jugendheim on the Ostsee, for cjmmunication with
the North—Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Finland; the third at
first stationed in Berlin and working in close connection with the
Quaker offices there, but afterwards removed to 152 Abbey House,
Westminster, so as to “ link up Berlin and London in direct com­
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 121
munication ” ; the fourth looking out on the Mediterranean, having
at present no abode but in the hands of responsible members of
the Union principally resident in Frankfurt-am-Main.
The chief members of the British group, besides Moya Jowitt, were
John Hargrave, S. Darwin Fox, Rolf Gardiner, and Roland Rerrill.
These people, all of pro-German sympathies, were contributors to
Youth, whilst in the number of that organ already referred to we
note an article by Harold Bing on behalf of the Youth Section of
the No More War Movement, of which Phyllis Bing was secretary.
Amongst the foreign contributors we find the names of Fritz Klatt,
Karl Wilker, Gustave Wyneken, Anton Mayer (the same that we
encountered on the Moscow organisation of the R.I.L.U. ?) and
Arnim T. Wegner. Besides publishing extraordinary blasphemies
—notably in the above-mentioned number, where an article appears
headed by a revolting caricature of the Crucifixion—Youth went in
for the cult of nature.
The Nudity Movement.—In Germany before the War the so-
called “ physical culture movement” had become the vogue, which
found expression in the cult of nudity, as practised by the sect
of German Communists known as “ Adamites ” in the fifteenth
century. “ It became the grand chic of an advanced set (in Berlin)
to give naked parties, at which the men smoked huge cigars and
the women were clothed only in bracelets, anklets, tiaras and
rings ” (article by Austin Harrison in the English Review, October
1914). Since the War this movement has grown in dimensions,
and owns a number of groups, institutes, libraries, holiday camps,
bathing resorts, etc. A “ Nudity ” candidate was even put up
for election to the Reichstag, and secured over 20,000 votes
(article in Sunday Express, July 19, 1925). According to an
American writer, Bruno Lasker, it has made great headway in the
Youth Movement of Germany, which is described as “ introducing
new and stimulating elements. One of these is the cult of naked­
ness.” Another was described as being free love. Mr. Lasker
went on to describe the crusade of one of the leaders of this move­
ment, Herr Muck-Lamberty, who “ with a following of twenty-
five youths and girls,” walked from town to town through the
forests of the mid-German hill country, leading the children in
harmless games of a cheerfulness they had never known, “ teaching
the young men and women dances and songs drawn from the very
sources . . . of the German spirit. . . . But one day it was dis­
covered that they were living not only in economic communism,
but also what seemed at first complete sexual promiscuity ” (see
interesting pamphlet by Mrs. Margaret L. Robinson, The Youth
Movement, issued by the Massachusetts Public Interests League.
Boston quoting article in Survey Graphic, December 1921).
Walter Pahl was one of the advocates of this movement, and in
an article in Youth and the American periodical the New Student,
which brought out a “ Special Supplement published in Germany,”
122 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
described the religion of the movement. Before the War youth
had become sceptical of Christianity; but after it the cry went
up : “ God is dead !” Youth became the enemy of the Church.
“ Naked and Free ” they denied dogma and doctrine, and found a
new God—the body. They were Christians no longer, so they
released the body and set themselves to “ the dance of the earth
and the stars within us,” in order to restore the great harmony
and holiness into our lives. “ Dancing in fact offers the greatest
religious emotion to a great part of our German youth.” It is
here we can trace the inspiration of the eurhythmic dancing practised
by the Steinerites of Germany, the Bolsheviks of Russia and certain
sects in our own country, which being, however, of the secret and
occult variety, do not enter into the scope of this book.
The New Grymnosophists.—One group practising the nudity
cult which does not appear to be a secret society may, however,
be mentioned here, that is “ The New Gymnosophical Society,”
which was founded in 1922. The object of this group was frankly
admitted to be the propagation of nude culture, because not only
physical but “ psychological ” health is much benefited by this
practice. In connection with this society, which is still in exist­
ence, or was as recently as last summer, is at least one Club, near
London, where the members pass week-ends entirely without
clothes. It seems that they do not always remain within bounds,
since a couple were found wandering in this condition on the Sussex
downs last summer (Sunday Express, August 20, 1925). The police
appear to have taken no action in the matter.
A co-educational school is connected with this movement.
Federation of British Youth Movements—The English branch of
the International League of Youth for Peace has now ceased to exist,
and its work has been taken over by the “ Federation of British
Youth Movements,” which was founded in January 1924, with
headquarters at 135 Bishopsgate, under the following personnel:
Chairman : Arthur Peacock.
Secretary : Miss Margaret Porteous.
National Secretary: Theodor Besterman (of the Guild of
Citizens of To-morrow, a subsidiary organisation of the
Theosophical Society).
Treasurer : Miss Phyllis Bing (of the No More War Movement).
A Conference of the Federation was held on May 2 and 3, 1925,
arranged by G. W- Arundale of the Theosophical Society, with which
the Federation seems to be closely connected.
At a further meeting in June, held in the form of a garden-party
at Kelmscott House, Hammersmith, the following Theosophical
groups were represented : The Guild of Citizens of To-morrow,
the Order of the Round Table, the Servers’ Group of Young Theo-
sophists, the World Federation of Young Theosophiste. Besides
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 123
these there were delegates from the No More War Movement, the
Fellowship of Reconciliation, the Young Friends’ Movement,
the I.L.P. and the Order of Woodcraft Chivalry of the Kibbo Kift.
The outstanding feature of this gathering of the Federation of
British Youth Movements was said by an observer to be predomi­
nantly foreign, and in particular German. German songs were
sung.
Kibbo Kift.—The movement known as Kibbo Kift, which also
carried on the work of the International League of Youth, is generally
said to have been formed in England in the spring of 1921, with
branches in Germany, Russia, Holland, France, Italy and Algeria.
From inside evidence it appears, however, that it was organised in
this country as early as 1919—that is to say, at about the same time
that the International League of Youth was formed in Copenhagen,
under German auspices, so that instead of being a British movement
with foreign branches, it seems not unlikely that it was all along
a part of the German “ Jugendbewegung,” and of the International
Federation of Youth. At any rate its teachings and aims are
identical, whilst John Hargrave, its reputed founder, whose “ anti-
militarist ” views had necessitated his leaving the staff of the Boy
Scouts, was, as we have seen, a contributor to Youth, in which
Kibbo Kift and its later organ the Nomad—the first one was called
the Mask—were advertised. Further, the address of the Business
Manager of the K.K., Kinsman G. C. Morris, was the same as the
address of the British branch of the International Federation of
Youth—152 Abbey House, Westminster—and Moya Jowitt, the
director of this bureau, was also the organiser of the K.K. scheme,
described as “ world survey.” The connection, if not the actual
identity, between the two movements is, therefore, evident.
The K.K. is described in a leaflet by the editor of the Nomad,
under the pseudonym of “ White Fox ”—presumably Hargrave
himself—as being a “ world peace movement,” which was largely
to be achieved by camping out; and its objects included the re­
organisation of industry on a non-competitive basis, international
disarmament, international free trade, an international currency
system, and the establishment of a World Council including every
civilised and primitive race or nation—formulas familiar to every­
one acquainted with the literature of International Socialism or
Grand Orient Masonry.
The Kibbo Kift is, in fact, a semi-secret society, and as such
cannot be thoroughly gone into here. This fact is very clearly
brought out in a novel, called Young Winkle, by John Hargrave
himself, in which the references made to a mysterious, brotherhood
active all over the world, to a ceremony of initiation, as also to
“ tribal patriotism ” and the happiness of savagery, are strangely
reminiscent of the German Illuminati. Leaving this occult aspect
of the K.K. aside, however, no doubt can be entertained as to its
anti-patriotic and subversive tendencies, the leader’s sneers at the
124 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Boy Scouts, at “ militarism ”—nothing, of course, about the Prus­
sian variety—his remarks on the evil of work, his insistence on sex
teaching and jeers at religion, plainly show the true character of
the organisation which he controls.
The “ world survey ” idea of the K.K., directed by Miss Moya
Jowitt, a scheme certainly more practical than occult, merits some
attention. In the May 1925 number of the Nomad, the young
“ Kinsmen ” are enjoined to make maps, giving the population,
industries, etc. One of the directions runs :
“ Visit and find out full information about, and m ake a list of,
all the present institutions, such as hospitals, museums, schools,
colleges, institutes, societies, movements, organisations, places of
worship, places of amusement, theatres, etc., in your district.”
Before the War German spies were known to be engaged on
making maps precisely on these lines. This habit of map-making
may not be all to the future advantage of Britain.
The K.K. is not confined to England ; in France it acquired land
at Le Talon, Chevreuse, Seine-et-Oise, where an International
camp was held in August 1924 In Poland it exists as a Woodcraft
League, known as the Zjednoczenie Wolnego Harcertswar ; in
Holland it goes under the name of “ Stormvogels.” The last
named was at first composed of children from six to twelve years
of age, who formed an avowedly Communist group led by Francine
Ruygers, and in August 1924 went bodily over to the Young Com­
munist organisation. This is illuminating, since in England the
K.K. professes to have no connection with Communism, although
in July 1923 it was stated that two delegates would attend the
Conference of the League of Communist Youth in Dresden. In
view of all this, it is interesting to read the names on the Advisory
Council of the K.K. in this country, published at this date. These
included Norman Angell, H. G. Wells, Rabindranath Tagore,
Havelock Ellis, Stephen Graham, Professor Julian S. Huxley,
Maurice Maeterlinck, Henry W. Nevinson, Maurice Hewlett, Mrs.
Pethick Lawrence, Professor Patrick Geddes, and J. Howard White-
house. It should be noted that the last name on this list is that of
the head master of a school founded at Bembridge, Isle of Wight,
some six years ago, for the purpose of carrying out new methods of
education, including what was termed self-government. A letter
advertising the scheme appeared on its inauguration in the Times,
and two years later a further letter was addressed to the same paper
signed by the head, J. Howard Whitehouse, also by Dean Inge,
Lord Henry Cavendish Bentinck, Charles F. Masterman (editor
of The Nation), Harold Laski (London School of Economics and
member of the Executive Committee of the American Civil Liber­
ties Union), Henry W. Nevinson and Noel Buxton (Labour Party
and 1917 Club). Two out of these seven supporters of the Bem­
bridge School were, therefore, on the Council of the Kibbo Kift.
YOUTH MOVEMENTS 125
At the moment of this book going to press a notice appears of
a meeting to be held on “ The Men of the Trees,” by Mr. Richard
St. Barbe Baker, who, we note in the Nomad for December 1924,
was presented by “ White Fox ” at Abbey House with a copper
plaque, inscribed with a message of brotherhood in symbol-writing.
My object in following up all these connections is not to censure
everyone who takes part in movements of this kind—e.g., it is
not alleged that every supporter of the Kibbo Kift is fully cognisant
or would approve of all it is and does—but to show by what an
intricate system of interlockings the members of subversive organisa­
tions contrive to spread their propaganda.
The movement for the demoralisation of British youth—the
undermining of patriotism and of belief in religion, and the revolt
against discipline—is very skilfully organised. For the children
of working-class parents there are the Socialist and Communist
Sunday Schools and the teachers of the same doctrines in the
Government schools; for both working-class and middle-class
children the various Socialist, Communist and Pacifist leagues;
for the boys and girls of the rich there is the insidious propaganda
instilled by masters, mistresses, lecturers and university dons,
secretly in the service of the country’s enemies. And unhappily
for all classes, there is the influence of those of the clergy who have
sold their birthright for a mess of red pottage.
The Socialism professed by certain members of our clergy to-day
must Qot be confounded with the “ Christian Socialism ” advocated
in the middle of the last century by Kingsley and Maurice. The
doctrines they taught were not at all identical with those known
politically as Communism or as Socialism. H in spirit they had
something in common with the Utopian Socialists of France, they
held nothing of the spirit expressed in Karl Marx’s Communist
Manifesto, which appeared at the time they carried on their cam­
paign. The formula now generally accepted as that of Socialism—
“ the nationalisation of all the means of production, distribution
and exchange ”—enters nowhere into their teaching, which was not
to advocate an economic theory that had already proved a failure,
but simply the reconstruction of the social order based on Christian
principles. However impracticable such an idea might be in view
of Christ’s own statement: “ My kingdom is not of this world,”
it was, nevertheless, sincere and free from the bitterness of modern
Socialism. For, whilst denouncing social evils, nowhere did they
preach class war ; on the contrary, in Alion Locke Charles Kingsley
condemned it in unmeasured terms, whilst the anti-Christian
teaching of Robert Owen in their own day and of Karl Marx—
whose influence only became felt in England after their lifetimes—
was the very antithesis of theirs.
Unlike Lord Shaftesbury, however, who declared Socialism
to be “ a plague deep-seated and rancorous,” they did not realise
that materialism and class hatred were almost always the accompani­
ments of the economic theory of Socialism; and so, by calling
themselves Socialists, they coupled together the names of two
creeds which, as the German Socialist Bebel truly observed,
“ stand towards each other as fire and water.” This was,
perhaps, excusable in men who, living before the Marxian era in
this country, could not see for themselves whither real Socialism
must lead.
But for men who can look back on the last forty years of Socialist
agitation, the position is entirely different. They know, or should
know, that since the founding of the Democratic Federation in
1881, Socialism in this country has been almost entirely derived
CHAPTER XIII
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY
126
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY 127
from the teaching of Marx, whose insistence on materialism, militant
atheism and advocacy of the class war, has divested the word
Socialism of all the idealism thrown around it by the Christian
Socialists of the last century. To profess Socialism •now is to
range oneself, whether consciously or not, with the enemies of
Christianity, as Mrs. Margaret L. Robinson has well explained
in her admirable pamphlet, Christian Socialism, a Contradiction
in Terms.
So, whilst the old Christian Socialists took the discredited word
Socialism and strove to invest it with the spirit of Christianity,
our so-called Christian Socialists of to-day take the pure and
beautiful doctrines of Christianity and infuse into them the spirit
of class hatred.
The Christian Social Union.—One of the first organisations
formed to disseminate the idea of Christianity in relation to social
life was the Christian Social Union, which, according to the head of
the Industrial Christian Fellowship with which it joined up in 1918,
originated much earlier, having been formed by Maurice and
Kingsley (who died respectively in 1872 and 1875), supported by
Canon Scott Holland, Bishop Gore and the Bishop of Lichfield
(letter from the Rev. P. T. Kirk to the Patriot, November 30, 1922).
The writer of this letter describes it as “ most certainly not avowedly
Socialistic.”
Another Christian Socialist organisation was the Guild of St.
Matthew, founded in 1877 by the Rev. Stuart Headlam, which
also does not appear to have been revolutionary in character; but
the Church Socialist League, formed in 1908, had for its founders
two men who have taken an active part in agitation—the Rev.
F. L. (now Canon) Donaldson, who describes himself as a “ convinced
Christian Socialist ” and who led and organised a march of Un­
employed from Leicester to London in 1905, and the Rev. Conrad
Noel, Vicar of Thaxted, Essex, who for many years has preached
the most virulent class hatred.
The Catholic Crusade.—It was not, however, until after the rise
of the Bolsheviks to power that the “ red clergy ” openly took up
their stand with the world revolutionaries. In America Bishop
Montgomery Brown proclaimed himself the “ Bishop of Bolsheviks
p.nd Atheists.” Conrad Noel, whilst continuing to profess Chris­
tianity, started his revolutionary Catholic Crusade in 1918. The
Hon. Sec. was at first the Rev. H. 0. Mason, the Rectory, Elland,
Yorkshire; in 1925 Robert Woodifield; whilst supporters of the
movement included the Rev. G. B. Chambers and the Rev. C. J.
Bucknall, who has recently been presented with the living of
Delabole, North Cornwall.
The Catholic Crusade has no official organ, but a number of
pamphlets have been published by it, including A Manifesto,
setting forth its objects, one of which is said to be “ to break up the
present world, and make a new in the power of the Outlaw of
128 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Galilee : Destruction not Reconstruction ” ; Creative Democracy,
which describes “ Apostolic Bolshevism and Democratic Succes­
sion: the Christian Soviet and the Episcopal International” ;
The Catholic Crusade, merely incoherent and blasphemous ravings ;
The Christian Religion : Dope or Dynamite; Is Jesus the Revolu­
tionary Leader ? etc. It is difficult to discover the doctrines of any
particular brand of Socialism in these publications, which are as
dull as they are revolting, and preach only a sort of aimless anarchy.
There is, however, perhaps more method than might be supposed
behind the madness of the Catholic Crusade, which appears to be
not unconnected with a certain secret society of an occult descrip­
tion. To follow up this line of investigation would take us
beyond the limits of this book; it may, however, be mentioned
that a certain clergyman who not long ago created a scandal by
his open expression of Bolshevist views is known to the present
writer by irrefutable evidence to have been a member of the
society in question, whilst the bishop who supported him was
head of an institution whence a number of members of the same
society were drawn.
The I.C.F.—The “ Industrial Christian Fellowship,” which was
formed out of the Navvy Mission on November 11, 1918, and after­
wards amalgamated with the Christian Social Union, is a society
of a very different order from the Catholic Crusade, from the leader
of which it has publicly disassociated itself. Indeed, it professes
not to be Socialist at all. “ We stand,” it declares, “ for Christ
and His principles, independent of party.” And again, “ The
Fellowship is not political; it is a spiritual effort, for we hold that
Christianity must pervade every department of life.”
But this does not prevent the I.C.F. in its official organ, The
Torch, from paying tribute to such Labour members of Parliament
as it may consider to be particularly fit instruments for this purpose ;
as for example, J. H. Thomas, George Lansbury, C. G. Ammon,
“ Bob ” Williams, etc. Nor did it deter one of its body of directors,
the Rev. F. E. Mercer, from writing a pamphlet called Why Church­
men should be Socialists; nor another from declaring at a public
meeting that “ the Capitalist system has broken down and will
end in a rotten chaos.” (The Patriot, August 9,1923).
Another leading light of the I.C.F., the Rev. G. A. Studdert
Kennedy, is alleged to have spoken at a Labour demonstration
beside George Lansbury on October 8, 1922, and with Saklatvala at
Bow Baths on February 25, 1923. It was on Armistice Day, 1921,
that he levelled his famous insult against the men who had fought
for England by saying th a t:
“ H e had appealed to the troops during the war, and encouraged
them to fight on the ground th at they were fighting for freedom and
honour. H e knew now it was nothing of the kind. There was no
freedom and there was no end to war. We had lied as a nation and
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY 129
besmirched our honour. W e had broken our promises and gone back
on our word in half a score of cases. . . . They were mad, he said ;
he himself was mad ; they were all m ad out there. They were given
decorations for w hat they did when they were m ad ” (Morning Post,
November 12, 1921).
Remonstrances addressed to the I.C.F. with regard to such
utterances have been met with the reply that the speaker was not
speaking in the name of the Fellowship, but as a private individual.
We have not heard of this system of dual personality leading to
the appearance of a member of the I.C.F. on the platform of, say,
—the British Fascists.
A dual personality appears, moreover, to be the characteristic
not only of individual members of the I.C.F., but of the society
itself. Thus on March 12, 1926, the present writer received a
circular of the I.C.F. in which it was again stated th a t:
“ I t m ay not be out of place to reaffirm the fact th a t the I.C.F.
is not pledged to any political party or to any scheme of economic
reform. I t stands for Christ and His principles, independent of party,
and seeks for means to pursue and extend its work and to proclaim
its message boldly and fearlessly as the Holy Spirit m ay direct.”
Appended to this was a leaflet describing an I.C.F. speaker
"in a poor class district ” pacifying the revolutionary tendencies
of the crowd.
Yet at this very moment it appears that the I.C.F. was issuing
a questionnaire on the coal crisis marked “ confidential,” inquiring
into the miners’ grievances and every detail of the coal trade, and
requesting that the document should be returned on March 6,
just when the Report of the Coal Commission was expected (Morning
Post, March 3, 1926). It certainly seems strange that a society,
not pledged to any scheme of economic reform, and standing only
for “ Christ and His principles,” should institute a searching
inquiry into the economic aspect of the coal trade, precisely at the
moment when the Government was engaged on the same task.
There has been close co-operation between some of the officials
and fervent Socialists who are notorious promoters of the class-
war, and whose public records are no security whatever for any
deep interest in the triumph of Christianity. The circulars of the
I.C.F. contain many statements in exact agreement with the policy
of the Socialist Party ; and have been quoted in the Patriot, from
November 9, 1922, to January 18, 1923, during its controversy
with the Fellowship. In that controversy it was shown that the
public literature of the I.C.F. is, in eSect, a preaching that the
way to the original Christian objects of the Fellowship is marked
out by the Socialist Party ; and is to be preceded by the destruction
of the capitalist system.
130 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
The following names, which appear on the circular of March
1926, presumably form the present personnel of the I.C.F. :
Presidents :
The Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Archbishop of York.
The Archbishop of Wales.
Vice-President and Chairman :
The Bishop of Lichfield.
Vice-Chairmen :
Bishop of Woolwich.
Major-General F. Maurice.
Hon. Treasurers :
Everard Hesketh.
Frank Hodges.
Hon. Trustee :
Lord Henry Bentinck.
William Cash.
Major J. D. Birchall, M.P.
Lord Beauchamp.
Margaret Bigge.
Lord Daryngton.
Sir Lynden Macassey.
Bishop of Manchester.
Sir Robert Newman, M.P.
Rev. H. R. L. Sheppard.
Constance Smith.
Sir Edwin Stockton.
Rev. G. A. Studdert Kennedy.
General Director :
P. T. R. Kirk.
The headquarters of the I.C.F. are at Fellowship House, 4 The
Sanctuary, Westminster.
The League of the Kingdom of God.—A so-called Christian
society which makes no effort to conceal its Socialistic character
is the “ League of the Kingdom of God,” the name assumed in
1923 by the Church Socialist League before mentioned. The
character of the society is officially given in these words :
“ The League is a band of Churchmen and Churchwomen who
believe th a t the Catholic F aith demands a challenge to the world by
the repudiation of capitalist plutocracy and the wage system ; and
stands for a social order in which the means of life subserve the common
weal.”
The particular brand of Socialism that the League favours seems
to be Guild Socialism, with which members of the Church Socialist
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY 131
League, notably Maurice B. Reckitt, had been associated, when
working in the Fabian Research Department with G. D. H. Cole.
The three leaders of the movement in the year that the change
of name took place were Maurice B. Reckitt (Vice-Chairman of the
C.S.L.), the Rev. Paul Stacy and N. E. Egerton Swann. Later the
Rev. T. C. Gobat was made Chairman, H. H. Slesser (now Sir Henry
Slesser) became Vice-Chairman and A. Hunter, Treasurer. George
Lansbury, who is just now agitating to get the blasphemy laws
revoked, and the Rev. J. Bucknall are also members.
The official organ of tho League is the Commonwealth (monthly),
edited by G. W. Wardman at Letchworth Garden City, Herts.
Society of Socialist Christians.—Another so-called Christian
society that makes no secret of its political aims is the “ Society
of Socialist Christians,” started in 1924 as an amalgamation of
smaller societies. The Secretary is Charles Record, 8 Victoria
Avenue, Elland, Yorkshire, and the official organ of the society is
The Crusader (weekly), printed by G. W. Wardman (editor of the
Commonwealth) at the Commonwealth Press, Letchworth, and
published by the Crusader Committee at 1 Mitre Court, Fleet Street,
E.C.4.
The aims of the Society of Socialist Christians are officially set
forth as follows :
“ The Society of Socialist Christians is a body of people who,
acknowledging the leadership of Jesus Christ, pledge themselves to work
and pray for the spiritual and economic em ancipation of all people
from the bondage of m aterial things, and for the establishm ent of the
Commonwealth of God on earth.
“ Recognising th a t th e present capitalist order of society is funda­
m entally anti-Christian, the Society will strive for the creation of
an international Socialist order based on the communal control of the
means of life and co-operation in freedom for the common weal.
“ The Society will work as p art of the Labour Movement. I t
believes th a t the necessary transform ation of our social order requires
a change of heart and m ind and will, and a corresponding change of
political and industrial arrangem ents ; substituting m utual service
for exploitation, and a social dem ocracy for the struggle of individuals
and classes.”
The last number of the Crusader (for May 28, 1926) quite frankly
approved of the recent General Strike, and deplored the blindness of
the Christian World in describing it as a failure. On another page
the editor of the Daily Herald is referred to as “ Comrade Hamilton
Fyfe.” Amongst contributors to the organ, and to the series of
“ Crusader Booklets,” are Father John Corner Spokes (editor of
the Crusader), Father Harold Buxton, the Rev. Seaward Beddow,
the Rev. W. G. Peck, the Rev. W. E. Orchard, Father Gilbert Clive
Binyon, Fred Hughes, B. C. Boulter, etc.
C.O.P.E.C.—In April of the same year (1924) that the Society
of Socialist Christians was founded a conference took place at
132 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
Birmingham to discuss the application of Christianity to social,
industrial, political and international problems, at which the follow­
ing resolution was passed :
“ T hat the Christian faith is fundam entally opposed to the spirit
of Imperialism as expressed in desire of conquest, m aintenance of
prestige, or the pursuit, in other forms, of the selfish interests of one
nation a t the expense of another.”
From this Conference arose the society known as C.O.P.E.C.,
standing for “ Christian Order of Politics, Economics and Citizen­
ship.” The Conference was presided over by Lord Parmoor, then
a member of the Socialist Government, who vehemently denounced
war and regretted that the Churches had not been unanimously
Pacifist during the Great War. Other speakers included Sir Henry
Slesser, E. D. Morel, and also the Rev. Studdert Kennedy of the
I.C.F., who declared that in future the Churches ought to support
the right of our forces to mutiny and for our sailors to lay down
their arms. It is only fair to add that in the following November
Mr. Kennedy expressed what appear to be absolutely opposite
views, declaring that any attempt at disarmament would be madness
(Times, November 11, 1924). Since then, however, he seems to
have reverted to anti-imperialism. It is impossible to keep pace
with the vagaries of some of these people.
A number of Pacifist and Socialist organisations, such as the
U.D.C., I.L.P., Fellowship of Reconciliation, No More War
Movement, League of the Kingdom of God, etc., were represented
at the C.O.P.E.C. Conference. The Chairman then elected for the
Committee of International Relations was E. F. Wise, who had left
the Board of Trade to take employment under the Soviet
Government.
The anti-patriotic and Socialist tendencies of C.O.P.E.C. have
been shown up by the Rev. Prebendary Gough, in his admirable
little book, The Fight for Man, where he wrote : “ The ordinary
wholesome Christian can only view all this 1Copec ’ parody and
perversion of Christianity with disgust.” Dean Inge, in a letter
to the Morning Post on January 1, 1925, described “ Copec ” as
“ the latest and most insidious attempt to politicise the Church and
capture organised Christianity for Socialism.”
In these words the Dean draws attention to the greatest danger
that confronts the Christian world. It is not the avowed Com­
munists, whose very violence repels all sane and wholesome minds,
who are likely to bring about the overthrow of Britain, and with
her the whole of civilisation; it is the so-called idealist and professing
Christian who most effectively carries out the devil’s work. Let
those of the clergy, whether Church of England, Nonconformist or
Roman Catholic—for renegade priests are not unknown—who are
preaching Communism, anti-patriotism and class hatred under the
guise of Christianity be denounced in the same unmeasured terms
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY 133
here as in America, where Senator Blanton, in the concluding
remarks of his exposure of the Bolshevist movement in the States,
declared : “ If the ministers of the Gospel have sold their services
to Russia, it is our duty to make it known to the public ” (Con­
gressional Record, December 19, 1925, p. 7).
Was it not written that in the latter days false prophets would
arise and deceive the very eleot ?
CHAPTER XIV
CONCLUSION
We have now seen a fraction, but only a fraction, of the vast net­
work of Socialism stretched over the civilised world. To pass the
whole in review would be the work of years. For when we consider
that in our own country alone, to which the greatest amount of space
in this book has been given, only the most important societies
have been mentioned, and that the list of societies, leagues, groups
and “ movements ”—Socialist, Pacifist, pseudo-religious or frankly
anti-religious—could be multiplied ad infinitum, what would be
the result, if we were to do this in the case of every part of the
world, including the Far East, on which the Bolsheviks’ attention
is now specially concentrated ? The network thus revealed would
surely be bewildering enough to make the human brain reel. And
even then the picture would be incomplete if we were still to exclude
the secret societies that provide so much driving power behind the
open movements. For example, in our own country one of the most
influential groups working for Socialism, the inner circle of the
Theosophical Society, enters into the category of secret societies,
and has, therefore, necessarily been excluded.
Enough of the open network has, however, been shown to give
some idea of its vastness and of its plan of construction. We have
seen how the marvellous brains behind it know how to utilise every­
thing that comes to their hand, so that they have now been able
to penetrate every sphere of human endeavour—art, literature,
education, women’s movements, religious movements—and to
gain control of all the means of publicity—the press, the theatre,
the cinema, and also broadcasting, which, even under a Conserva­
tive Government, serves as a mouthpiece for Socialist propaganda.
Let us make no mistake, the disintegrating doctrines of inter­
national Socialism are spreading slowly but surely throughout
our country. It is true that at the last General Election Con­
servatism won a sweeping victory, yet there was an increase of a
million votes for the Socialist Party. It is true that the General
Strike has this time been defeated, yet over three million free-born
Britons came out with the docility of Russian moujiks at the call
of their leaders in an attack on the life of the nation. In 1921
the railwaymen were clearly unwilling to join in what some
of them called a Bolshevik move ; in 1926 they obeyed—not to a
CONCLUSION 135
man, for the few who stayed in proved the possibility of disobeying
strike orders—but in a vast majority. The evil has been progressive.
Optimists have declared that the weapon of the General Strike
has now been broken. It will only remain broken as long as the
means for maintaining the life of the community remain in the
hands of a Constitutional Government The plan to starve the
nation into submission to the dictates of the trade union leaders by
means of a General Strike was the basis of the plot in 1921 and
1926. Had the offer of the T.U.C. to control the food supplies of
the country been accepted, how far might this scheme not have
been realised ? The present Conservative Government knew better
than to accept: a Socialist Government would not dare to refuse,
even if it wished to do so.
The question then arises : What are we doing to prevent the
advent of a government to power which either by legislation or
the General Strike will bring about the ruin of our country ?
On one hand we see the vast organisation of Socialism, on the other
a few patriotic societies, appealing often vainly to the public for
support.
Let us examine the essential points in which Socialist organisa­
tion surpasses our own, and consider how, by taking a leaf out of
the enemy’s book, wo might bo able to put up a more effectual
opposition.
I. The Socialist Movement has Unlimited F unds at its
Disposal
Besides financial aid from abroad, the Socialists exact contribu­
tions from Socialist and non-Socialist workers alike. We not only
tolerate this political levy being made on our own supporters, but
do not counter it by subscribing generously ourselves. Conserva­
tives who think nothing of spending a guinea for a stall at the theatre
will grudge ten shillings towards anti-Socialist propaganda.
II. The Socialist Movement is Co-oedinated
Although these innumerable Socialist and Pacifist groups,working
in different ways for the same ends, continue to exist—since their
leaders well know that amalgamation would be fatal—they are able
by an ingenious system of interlocking, and by placing the same
people on the councils of several different groups at a time, to co­
ordinate their activities in the form of literature, meetings, demon­
strations, etc.
Our societies are not only disconnected, but too often, instead
of being allies, they are rivals. It is not that there are too many
of them, for there would be work for all to do if only it were
properly apportioned. Some plan of co-operation should be devised
which would prevent them ploughing the same furrow and getting
in each other’s way.
III. The Socialist Movement is Internationally Organised
The strength of Socialism in every country depends largely
on foreign support. The interchange of communications between
countries not only furnishes information but brings variety and
enthusiasm into the movement. International Conferences are
also a great source of inspiration. In 1922 the Communist Party
had no less than twenty linguists translating foreign books, papers,
etc., and preparing them for publication.
The anti-Socialist societies in this country have practically
no linguists, ignore much that is published abroad in the interests
of the cause, and hold very little communication with kindred
groups in other countries. No International Anti-Socialist Con­
ferences have been organised that in the present writer’s opinion
are likely to be of any great value to the cause. What is needed
is an International of Patriots, composed of the groups in every
country standing for sane nationalism, private property, morality
and the Christian faith.
IV. The Socialist Movement has Intelligence Departments
Behind It
The first thing the Bolsheviks did when they seized the reins
of power was to establish a Bureau of Information. In this
country the Labour Party Joint Research Department acts sis a
clearing-house of information for the Labour Party and the T.U.C.,
whilst the Labour Research Department performs the same office
for associates of trade unions, local Labour parties, Socialist and
Communist societies of an “ extreme ” kind. “ The Department
furnishes statistics, arguments, literature and newspaper articles
to order ” (Publicity Manipulation, pamphlet, published by the
Boswell Printing and Publishing Company).
On our side neither the Conservative Party nor the independent
anti-Socialist societies have any central bureau for the collection
and distribution of information to which propagandists can apply
with any certainty of finding the data they require. Each society
collects a certain amount of information which it keeps for its own
use. All this put together and collected would be of enormous
value—at present each collection is necessarily incomplete.
V. The Socialist Movement Welcomes Enthusiasts
Moderate Socialists, whilst publicly professing to disapprove of
“ Extremists,” invariably stand by them against the constitutional
parties. Even when it comes to deeds of violence, the whole force
of the Socialist movement—political, Pacifist and “ religious ”—
will be put into action to save the offender from punishment.
On our side the Moderates deride enthusiasts, whom they are
fond of describing as “ Extremists.” They fail to recognise, as
136 THE SOCIALIST NETWORK
CONCLUSION 137
do the Socialists, that the driving force of every party lies in its
strongest wing. The Conservative Party must develop a Right
Wing as strong as tho “ Labour ” Party’s Left Wing, if it is to hold
its own.
VI. The Socialist Movement Gives no Quarter to the
Enemy
Socialists never lose an opportunity of scoring over their
opponents or fail to detect a weak spot in their armour. They
believe in using every method of warfare, fair or foul.
We, on our part, from a mistaken spirit of “ fair play,” avoid
touching our opponents on a vulnerable point and leave our
strongest weapons to rust in our armoury. On the pretext of
“ giving the other side a hearing,” the Conservative press, whilst
closing its columns to “ Die-hards,” opens them to revolutionary
Socialists. “ Labour ” agitators can now make large sums by
writing for it. The Socialist press never makes the mistake of
inviting a convincing Conservative writer to put his point of view
before its readers. Socialism has it all its own way, and is able
to use the organs of its opponents for its propaganda.
The above are some of the differences between Socialist and
anti-Socialist organisation which, if removed, would lead to the
strengthening of our cause. I do not say that we should follow the
Socialists’ lead on every point. For the success of Socialism is
above all due to the fact that it is essentially a system of deception.
It wins the uneducated classes by false promises, the semi-educated
by false premises, and the unwary by camouflage. To modern
Socialists, as to the Jacobins of France, “ Tous les moyens sont
bons.”
But there is no reason why Conservatism, whilst retaining its
old traditions of honour and fair play, should not free itself from
the time-honoured reproach of stupidity and of inertia. Let us
admit this to the credit of our opponents : they work a great deal
harder than we do. The propaganda of Socialism goes on cease­
lessly and with unremitting energy. Day and night it circulates
in factories and mining centres, at the street corners of our great
cities and in our peaceful villages. So the red tide rises steadily,
and unless we work far harder than we have done before, and above
all organise as we have never done, this island may be submerged
as were France and Russia before us.
DIAGRAM OF THE
MOSCOW ORGANISATION
T
HE part of the large chart accompanying this book which
relates to Moscow being arranged so as to show the chrono­
logical order in which the various international depart­
ments of the Russian Communist Party came into existence, it has
been thought advisable to add a diagram showing the shape the
whole Moscow organisation now takes, together with its present
personnel. The Bolshevist system of world government will thus
be seen resting on two principal pillars : (1) the TS.I.K. (Tsentralnii
Ispolnitelnii Komitet) or Central Executive Committee of the
U.S.S.R. (Union of Socialist Soviet Republics), composed of Rus­
sian subjects, corresponding to our Cabinet and controlling the
State Departments of the Government, and (2) the I.K.K.I.
(Ispolnitelnii Komitet Kommunisticheskovo Internazionala) or
Executive Committee of the Komintern (Communist Internationale),
composed of representatives from all countries, directing the
activities of the Communist Parties affiliated to it everywhere.
Between the two comes the Profintern (Red International of Labour
Unions), also international in form, exercising the same control
over the Red Trade Union movement in all parts of the world.
The point this diagram is particularly intended to illustrate
is that since the Poht-Bureau of the Russian Communist Party
controls the TS.I.K., the I.K.K.I., the Profintern and, through this
last, the All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions, and since
the same men who compose it also figure in the Executives of all
these bodies, therefore the Communist Parties and the Red Trade
Union organisations in all countries affiliated with these are in
reality controlled by the Russian Government.
It should be understood that, as the personnel of all these
committees changes constantly, the lists here given only apply to
the present moment.
The Sport Internationale and the Peasants’ Internationale that
appear both in the chart and the diagram, are not dealt with in the
course of this book, as their affiliations in this country are not yet
of any importance.
138
D IA G R A M OF T H E MOSCOW O R G A N ISA T IO N
PO LIT-B U REA D OF T H E RUSSIAN COMMUNIST PA RTY ,
U P TO MARCH 1926
Zinoviev
Stalin
Voroshilov
Bukharin D e p t . Mem b e r s
Rykov Kam enev
Tomsky R udsutak
Kalinin Potrovski
Trotsky Dzorjinski
Molotov Uliyanov
K O M IN TER N
Presidium of I.K .K .I.
Zinoviev
Stalin >R u ssia
B ukharin J
*1W. Gallachor, E n g la n d
J . Larkin,
Sem ard
2 Cachin
3 Viola,
4 W interich
6 Goschko
Hansen,
6 Zapototski
7 Hakin
Kolorov,
Roy,
Sam born
Dorsy
Sen K atayam a, J apan
Su-Fan, Ch in a
Clara Zetkino, S pe c ia l
5TNTI
I r ela n d
j F ra n ce
I ta ly
| G erm a n y
Sc a n d in a v ia
) Czech o -
j S lo vakia
B a lkans
I n d ia
| Am erica
PR O F IN T E R N
Central Executive Com m ittee
A. Losovsky (Oen. Secty.)
Dogadov
Melnichanski
K alinin
N at. W atkins,
Monmousseau
Jakov
Semard
Vecchi,
H ekkert
J anderle
Heine
Pavlik
Stab
Nin,
Voitkovitch,
D m itrov,
Johnson,
K. Ando,
^ R u ssia
E n gland
^ F ran ce
I ta ly
| G erm a n y
I Czech o -
j S lo v a k ia
Spa in
P oland
B u lg a ria
A m erica
J a pa n .
KOMSOMOL
(Young Communist
League)
Central C’tee.
Pres. :
Lazar Schatzkino
SPO R TIN TER N
(Sport International)
Exec. C’tee.
Pres. :
Mering
K R E ST IN T E R N
(Peasants' Internal.)
Exec. C’tee.
Pres. :
A. P. Smirnov
* A t the election for the I.K .K .I. on March 17, 1926, the
following changes were made :
1. Replaced by A. Ferguson. 2. Replaced by Treint.
3. Replaced by Ercoli. 4. Replaced by Thaelmann.
6. Replaced by Remmele. Qandl. Replaced by Smeral.
Other English Members of I.K .K .I. not on Presidium :
MacManua, P ollitt, E. H. Brown.
TS.I.K . of the
U.S.S.R. Presidium
includes:
Tom sky
Stalin
Kam enev
A. P. Smirnov
K alinin
Andreiev
R udsutak
Petrovsky
Evodokim ov
Uliyanov
Ivanov
A itakov
STATE D EPTS. OF
U.S.S.R.
ALL RUSSIAN
CENTRAL
COUNCIL OF
TR A D E UNIONS
Pres. : Tomsky
Losovsky
Melnichansky
Andreiev
Lepso
Dogadov
Mikhailov
Glebov-Avilov
Chernysheva
K utuzov, etc.
139
ABBREVIATIONS
Note.—Where not otherwise indicated those societies belong to Great
Britain.
A.C.W.U. (Am.)
A.E.U. .
A.S.E. .
A.S.L.E. & F. .
A.S.W. .
A.T.W. (Am.) .
A.U.B.T.U. .
I.L.G.W.U. (Am.)
I.T.G.W.U. .
N.A.F.T.A. .
N.F.B.T.O. .
N.T.W.F.
N.U.D.A.W. .
N.U.G.W.
N.U.J. .
N.U.R. .
N.U.T. .
S. W.M.F.
T. W.F. (Ir.) .
U. P.W. . .
W.F.M. (Am.) .
A.A.
A.C.L.U..
A.F. of L.
A.L.L.A..
A.N.C. .
A.P.C.F.
A.R.C.C.T.U. .
A. R.C.P..
B.B. of R.I.L.T.U.
Belg. L.P.
B.K.S.P..
B.N.C.P..
B.S.P. .
0. of A. .
C.A.P. .
c c
c !g .T. (Fr.) !
C.G.T.U.
C.L.C. .
C.L.P. (Am.) .
TRADE UNIONS
Amalgamated Clothing Workers’ Union.
Amalgamated Engineering Union.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and
Firemen.
Amalgamated Society of Woodworkers.
Amalgamated Textile Workers’ Union.
Amalgamated Union of Building Trade Unions.
International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union.
Irish Transport and General Workers’ Union.
National Amalgamated Furnishing Trades Associa­
tion.
National Federation of Building Trade Operatives.
National Transport Workers’ Federation.
National Union of District and Allied Workers.
National Union of General Workers.
National Union of Journalists.
National Union of Railwayman.
National Union of Teachers.
South Wales Miners’ Federation.
Transport Workers’ Federation of Ireland.
Union of Post Office Workers.
Western Federation of Miners.
OTHER ORGANISATIONS
American Anarchists.
American Civil Liberties Union.
American Federation of Labour.
American League to Limit Armaments.
American Neutral Conference.
Anti-Parliamentary Communists’ Federation.
All Russian Central Council of Trade Unions.
All Russian Congress of Peasants.
British Bureau of Red International of Labour Unions.
Belgian Labour Party.
Union of Fight-and-Propaganda Clubs (Holland),
British National Peace Congress.
British Socialist Party.
Council of Action.
Communist Workers’ Party of Holland,
Catholic Crusade.
Confederation Generals du Travail.
Confederation Generals du Travail Unitaire.
Central Labour College.
Communist Labour Party of America,
HO
ABBREVIATIONS 141
C.o.
C.P. (Am.)
C.P. (Aust.)
O.P. (Belg.)
C.P. (Fr.)
C.P.Q. .
C.P.Q.B.
C.P. (Hoi.)
C.P.I. .
C.S.L. .
C.S.U. .
C. W.S.D.
D. F.
E. P.F. (Am.)
Fab.
F.Q.
First Am. C.D T.P.
F.B.Y.M.
F.I.O.M.
F.O.R. .
F.R.D. .
F. S.R. (Am.)
G. O.a. .
G. S.
H. O.R.O.
I. A.P.A. .
I.O.F. .
I.C.W.P.A.
I.F.T.U. .
I.L.P. .
I.L.T. .
Int. Peace Scouts
I.P.S. .
I.8.L. .
I.S.R.B. .
I.W.U. .
I. W.W. .
J. P.S. .
K. A.
K.K.
L.K.G. .
L.N.U. .
L.P.
L.P. (Nor.)
L.P.F. .
L.R.C. .
L.R.D. .
L.S.I. .
Mensh. .
M.F.G.B.
M.M.M. .
M. R.M. .
N. 0.0. .
N.O.C.L.
N.C.F. .
N.C.L.O..
N.C.P.W.
N.G.L. .
Conscientious Objector.
Communist Party of America.
Communist Party of Austria.
Communist Party of Belgium.
Communist Party of France.
Communist Propaganda Groups.
Communist Party of Great Britain.
Communist Party of Holland.
Communist Party of Ireland.
Church Socialist League.
Christian Social Union.
Councils of Workmen’s and Soldiers’ Delegates.
Democratic Federation.
Emergency Peace Federation of America.
Fabian Society
Freedom Group.
First American Conference for Democracy and Terms
of Peace.
Federation of British Youth Movements.
Federazione Italiano Operai Metallurgichi.
Fellowship of Reconciliation.
Fabian Research Department.
Friends of Soviet Russia.
Glasgow Communist Group.
Guild Socialism.
Hands Off Russia Committee.
International Arbitration and Peace Association.
Industrial Christian Fellowship.
International Class War Prisoners’ Aid.
International Federation of Trade Unions.
Independent Labour Party.
International League of Youth.
International Peace Scouts.
International Peace Society.
Industrial Syndicalist League.
Irish Socialist Republican Brotherhood.
Irish Workers’ Union.
Industrial Workers of the World.
Jewish Peace Society.
Kropotkine Anarchists.
Kibbo Kift.
League of the Kingdom of God.
League of Nations Union.
Labour Party of Great Britain
Norwegian Labour Party.
League of Peace and Freedom.
Labour Representation Committee.
Labour Research Department.
Labour Socialist International — 2nd or Hamburg
International.
Mensheviks.
Miners’ Federation of Great Britain.
Miners’ Minority Movement.
Miners’ Reform Movement.
National Council Against Conscription.
National Council for Civil Liberties.
No Conscription Fellowship.
National Council of Labour Colleges.
National Council for the Prevention of War.
National Guilds League.
142 ABBREVIATIONS
N.M.M. . National Minority Movement.
N.M.W.C. National Mine Workers’ Committee.
N.M.W.M. No More War Movement.
N.P.C. . National Peace Council.
N.S.P. . National Socialist Party.
N.U.W.C.M. . National Unemployed Workers’Committee-Movement.
P.C. (Am.) People’s Council of America.
P.L. Plebs League.
P.S.S.S.M. Proletarian Socialist Sunday School Movement.
Q. . . . Quaker.
R.Col. . Ruskin Labour College.
R.I.L.U. Red International of Labour Unions.
R.P.S. . Rationalist Peace Society.
R.S.D.P.. Russian Social Democratic Party.
Russ.S.F. Russian Socialist Federation.
S.C.R. . Society for Cultural Relations.
S.D.F. . Social Democratic Federation.
S.D.A.P. (Hoi.) Social Democratic Labour Party of Holland.
S.D.P. (Aust.) . Social Democratic Party of Austria.
S.D.P. (Ger.) . Social Democratic Party of Germany.
S.D.P. (Hoi.) . Social Democratic Party of Holland.
S.D.P. (Sw.) . Social Democratic Party of Switzerland.
S.L. Socialist League.
S.L.P. . Socialist Labour Party.
8.L.P. (Am.) . Socialist Labour Party of America.
S.P. (Am.) Socialist Party of America.
S.P. (Fr.) Socialist Party of France.
S.P. (Ger.) Socialist Party of Germany.
S.P.G.B.. Socialist Party of Great Britain.
S.P. (It.). Socialist Party of Italy.
S.P.L. . School Peace League.
S.P. (Sw.) Socialist Party of Switzerland.
Spart. Spartacists.
S.S.S. . Socialist Sunday Schools.
S.S.S.M. . Socialist Sunday School Movement.
T.S. Theosophical Society.
T.U.C. . Trade Union Congress.
T.U.C. (Par. C’tee.) . Trade Union Congress Parliamentary Committee.
T.U.E.L. (Am.) Trade Union Educational League.
T.U.U. . Trade Union Unity.
U.D.C. . Union of Democratic Control.
U.S.F. . University Socialist Federation.
Workers’ Defence Union.
W.D.U. (Am.) .
W.E.A. . Workers’ Educational Association.
W.I.C.P.P. Women’s International Committee for Permanent
Peace.
W.I.I.U. (Am.) Workers’ International Industrial Union of America.
W.I.L. . Women’s International League.
W.I.L.P.F. . Women’s International League for Peace and
Freedom.
W.I.R. . Workers’ International Relief.
W.P. of Am. . Workers’ Party of America.
W.P.C. . Women's Peace Crusade.
W.S.F. . Workers’ Socialist Federation.
Y.C.I. . Young Communists’ Internationale.
Y.C.L. . Young Communists’ League.
INDEX OF PERSONS
The initials after the names of persons denote the organisations with
which each is or has been connected and of which the full title is given in
the preceding list of abbreviations. In the case of trade unions, initials are
enclosed in brackets. The figures following the initials indicate the page of
this book on which the connection of the person with the society in question
is mentioned ; initials not followed by a figure indicate organisations to which
the person is known from reliable sources to belong, but with whioh their
connection may not be mentioned in the course of this book.
Ablett, Noah (M.F.G.B.), 62, 85 ;
C.L.O. 29 ; M.R.M. 30 ; B.B. of
R.I.L.U. 84
Abraham, W. (N.U.R.), 79 ; L.P.
Abramovitch, alias Zalewski, alias
Albreicht, 49 ; Tcheka 49
Adamson, W. (Miners’ Assoc.), C. of
A. 78 ; M.P., L.P.
Addams, Jane, A.L.L.A. 37 ;
W.I.O.P.P. or W.I.L.P.F. 37, 104,
109; A.N.O. 38; F.O.R. 38;
A.C.L.U. 110
Adler, Friedrich, 44, 98 ; murderer
of Count Sturgh 52 ; Sec. of
L.S.I. 89 ; denounces Report of
Brit. T.U. Del., 1924 89
Adler, Victor, S.D.P. (Aust.) 52
Aitken, G. S., N.C.L.C. 93
Alber, 114
Albreicht. See Abramovitch
Albury, A., 23
Aldred, Guy, S.D.F. 16; seceded
from S.D.F. 27 ; founded Com­
munist Propaganda Groups 27 ;
started Herald of Revolt 27 ;
founded Glasgow Communist
Group 27 ; founded A.P.C.F. 69,
70
Allen, Clifford, N.O.F. 35 ; N.C.C.L.
36; Fab., I.L.P., N.G.L., 1917
Club
Ammon, 0. G. (U.P.W.), 128;
N.C.C.L. 36; 1917 Club 36;
C.W.S.D. 62; H.O.R.C. 64; I.L.P.,
L.P. (Nat. Ex.)
Anderson, Tom, 113, 118 ; Pres.
P.S.S.S.M.
Anderson, W. C., 62 ; I.L.P. 34;
U.D.C. 34 ; 1917 Club 36
Andreas, Leo, 115
10
Andreiev, A. A., TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88 ;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Andrew, Stephen P., 26
Andreychine, George, R.I.L.U. 81
Angell, Norman, E.C. of U.D.C. 34 ;
1917 Club 36; N.C.P.W. 108;
K.K. 124
Antipov, TS.I.K. 88 ; A.R.C.C.T.U.
88
Appleby, Bertram, E.C. of N.M.W.M.
105
Appleton, W. A., I.F.T.U. 73 ; re­
signs presidency of I.F.T.U. 78
Arnot, Robert Page, B.B. of R.I.L.U.
84 ; L.R.D. 93 ; C.P.G.B. 95, 101 ;
U.S.F.
Arundale, G. W., T.S. 122
Ashtaria, 46
Ashton, Lord, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Ashton, Margaret, E.C. of W.I.L.
35, 104
Askkenouzi, George, C.P. (Am.) 56
Attlee, Major C. R., E.C. of U.D.C.
104 ; N.C.P.W. 108 ; L.P., I.L.P.,
N.M.W.O.
Aulard, Professor, Clart6 103
Aveling, Dr., S.D.F. 16 ; S.L. 17 ;
I.L.P. 19
Axelrod, R. 25
Ayles, Walter H., E.C. of N.M.W.M.
105 ; I.L.P., N.O.F., F.O.R., 1917
Club
Baars, 51 ; C.P. (Hoi.)
Babeuf, Francis Noel, 10
Bacharach, A. L., L.R.D. 93 ; 1917
Club, U.S.F., C.P.G.B.
Baillie-Weaver, H., L.P.F. 35 ; T.S.
(Gen. Sec.) 101 ; S.O.R. 101 ;
143 I
144 INDEX OF PERSONS
E.C. of L.N.U. 108; N.C.P.W.
108; I.L.P., Fab., N.P.O., 1917
Club
Baker, Bertha Kuntz, E.O. of A.N.O.
38
Baker, Charles, C.L.P. (Am.) 67
Baker, Richard St. Barbe, 125
Bakunin, Michel, 12, 40, 54
Balabanova, Angelica, 44, 52
Batch, Emily Green, First Am.
OJD.T.P. 38; P.O.A. 109; Sec.
W.I.L.P.F. 110
Baldwin, Roger, 54, 110, 119
Ballantyne, Y.C.L. 117
Bamber, Mrs. M„ H.O.R.C. 64;
B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84
Barbusse, Henri, W.I.R. 99 ; Clart6
103
Barnes, Alfred, Vice-Pres. W.I.R.
99 ; Vice-Pres. Int. Peace Scouts
107 ; L.P., I.L.P.
Barnes, George N., I.L.P. 21
Barrett, George, F.G. 70
Barthel, Max, 115
Bartlett, P. W., F.O.R. 35, 119
Batt, Dennis E., 56
Bauer, Otto, C.P. (Aust.) 52
Bax, Belfort, 23 ; S.D.F. 16; S.L. 17
Beard, Dr. Charles, R. Col. 29
Beauchamp, Earl, Pres. N.C.P.W.
108 ; I.C.F. 130
Bebel, August, leader of S.D.P.
(Ger.) 25, 126
Bedacht, M„ 59 ; C.L.P. (Am.) 57
Beddow, Rev. Seaward, 131
Beesley, Professor, 11, 16
Behrens, Miss E., J.P.S. 32
Bell, Richard, member of L.R.O.
BeU, Tom, E.C. of C.P.G.B. 67, 95,
101; B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84
Bellanca, August (A.C.W.U.J, 82
Belsey, H., 23
Beresford, G. C., N.S.P. 33
Berrill, Roland, 121
Berkman, Alexander, A.A. 54, 58
Berzine, Jean, 52
Besant, Annie, S.D.F. 16 ; Fab. 18 ;
President T.S., L.N.U.
Besterman, Theodor, F.B.Y.M. 122
Bianki, Peter, 58
Bigge, Margaret, I.C.F. 130
Bilan, Alexander, 44, 46; C.L.P.
(Am.) 67
Bing, Harold F., 121 ; E.C. of
N.M.W.M. 105
Bing, Phyllis, 121, 122 ; Sec. Youth
Section N.M W.M.
Binyon, Father Gilbert Clive, 131
Binyon, Mrs. Laurence, E.C. of
W.I.L. 104
Birchall, Major J. D., I.C.F. 130
Birmingham, Bishop of, N.C.P.W.
108
Bittleman, Alexander, C.P. (Am.) 56;
W.P.A. 59
Blanc, Louis, 10
Bland, Hubert, Fab. 18
Blanqui, 11
Blanton, Senator, 132
Blatchford, Robert, editor of the
Clarion 20 ; I.L.P. 20
Blaustein, I., 23
Blizard, G. P., Hon. Sec. of F.R.D.
18 ; Fab., 1917 Club
Blum, Leon, S.P. (Fr.) 49
Bogdanov, A., 69
Bombacci, 46 ; S.P. (It.) 60
Bondfield, Margaret, E.C. of W.I.L.
35 ; N.C.C.L. 36 ; 1917 Club 36 ;
0. of A. 78 ; Fab., I.L.P., L.P.,
T.U.C.
Booth, N.M.M. 86
Boothman, H., Gen. Council Brit.
T.U.C. 90
Bordiga, A., 46 ; S.P. (It.) 60
Boughton, Rutland, 102
Boukharine, 10, 44, 46
Boulter, B. C., 131
Bouvman, C.P. (Hoi.) 61
Bowen, J. W. (U.P.W.), Gen. Council
Brit. T.U.C. 90 ; 1917 Club
Bowyer, R. G., 96
Bracher, S. V., L.P.F. 35 ; N.C.F.,
N.M.W.M.
Brailsford, H. N., U.D.C. 34 ; I.L.P.
34, 102 ; S.C.R. 101
Bramley, Fred (N.A.F.T.A.), Sec.
T.U.C. (Pari. C’tee.), 77, 90 ; Sec.
T.U.C. 88, 92 ; delegate to Russia
(1924) 89 ; W.E.A. 94; S.C.R.
101
Brandes, Georges, Clart6 103
Brandsteder, C.P. (Hoi.), 61
Branting, Hjalmar, 44, 62
Brassington, Isaao (N.U.R.),
H.O.R.C. 64
Breckenridge, Sophonisba P.t
A.C.L.U. 110
Brockway, A. Fenner, N.O.F. 35 ;
E.C. of N.M.W.M. 105; I.L.P.,
1917 Club
Brockway, Clare, 119
Bromley, John (A.S.L.E. & F.), 90 ;
H.O.R.C. 64 ; C. of A. 78 ; dele­
gate to Russia, 1924 88; Vice-
Pres. W.I.R. 99; T.U.C. (Gen.
Couno.)
Brommert, C.P. (Hoi.) 51
Browdor, Earl R., W.P.A. 59
Brown, A. Kemp, E.O. of I.P.S. 107
INDEX OF PERSONS 1*6
Brown, Beatrice O.M.,Seo.N.M.W.M.
105
Brown, O., N.O.L.C. 93
Brown, E. H., E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95 ;
I.L.P.
Brown, H. Runham, E.O. of
N.M.W.M. 105
Brown, J. W., I.F.T.U, 87
Buchez, 10
Bucknall, Rev. O. J., C.C. 127 j
L.K.G. 131
Buonarotti, 10
Burden, A., N.S.P. 33
Burgess, Fred., I.L.P. 29 ; C.L.O. 29
Burgess, Joseph, Labour Union of
Bradford 20
Burgneay, G., L.R.D. 93
Burman, F., W.P.A. 69
Burns, Emile, B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ;
L.R.D. 93 ; I.C.W.P.A. 100
Burns, John, S.D.F. 16 j M.P. for
Battersea 21
Burrows, Herbert, D.F. 16
Buxton, N.U.W.C.M. 96
Buxton, Charles Roden, S.C.R. 101 ;
C.W.S.D., I.L.P., W.E.A.
Buxton, Harold, 131
Buxton, Noel, L.P. 124 ; 1917 Club
124
Cachin, Marcel, C.P. (Fr.) 49
Cadbury, Barrow, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Cadbury, Mrs. George, Treas. of
N.C.P.W. 108
Cafiero, 26
Caillaux, S.P. (Fr.) 49
Cameron, A. G. (A.S.W.), H.O.R.O.
64 ; C. of A. 78 ; L.P., I.L.P.
Campbell, John Ross, E.O. of
C.P.G.B. 95, 101 ; R.I.L.U.
Cannon, J. P., W.P.A. 59
Cant, Ernest Walter, C.P.G.B. 101 ;
B.S.P., C.O.
Canterbury, Archibishop of, Pres, of
I.C.F. 129
Carney, Jack, C.L.P. of America 57 ;
F.S.R. 61
Cash, William, I.C.F. 130
Cavendish-Bentinck, Lord Henry,
124 ; Vice-Pres. I.P.S. 106 ; I.C.F.
130
Ceton, S.D.P. (Hoi.) 50; C.P. (Hoi.)
51
Chalmers, Rev. Humphrey, E.C. of
I.P.S. 107
Chaman Lai, I.C.W.P.A. 100
Chamberlain, W. J. (N.U.J.),
N.M.W.M. 105 ; L.P., I.L.P., C.O.
Chambers, Rev. G. B., C.C. 127
Champion, H. H., D.F. 16, 127
Chandler, Councillor R., 114
Chemishova, Olga, A.R.C.O.T.U. 89
Chick, Miss Mary, Hon. Nat. Seo.
W.I.L. 104
Citrine, Walter M. (Electr. T.U.), 92
T.U.C. (Assist. Sec.) 88
Clark, G. B., D.F. 16; Radioed,
Freethinker
Clark, Dr. Hilda, E.C. of W.I.L. 104
Clarke, William, Fab. 18
Clemenceau, 25
Cluse, W. S., S.D.F. 68
Clynes, J. R. (N.U.G.W.), I.L.P.
21 ; C. of A. 78 ; N.C.P.W. 108 ;
L.P.
Coates, —, W.I.R. 97
Cocks, F. Seymour, U.D.O. 34
Cohen, J., Y.C.L., 117
Cohen, Maximilian, Ex. Sec. Left
Wing S.P. of America 55; C.P.
(Am.) 56
Cohen, Miss Rose, E.C. of W.I.R. 99 ;
C.P.G.B.
Cohn, Fania M. (I.L.G.W.U.), 82
Coit, Miss Adela, E.C. of W.I.L. 104
Cole, G. D. H„ 92, 93, 94 ; F.R.D.
18; Guild Socialist, 30, 92 ;
L. R.D. 93; S.C.R. 101; 1917
Club, Fab.
Colthoff, C.P. (Hoi.) 51
Colyer, W. T., C.P. (Am.), 102;
Sec. Left Wing Prov. C’tee. (Eng­
land) 102
Conolly, James, leader of I.S.R.B.
24, 71 ; Marx on, 24
Conolly, Roderick, C.P.I. 71
Conradi, 44
Cook, A. J. (M.F.G.B.), 95, 102;
M. R.M. 30 ; B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ;
E.C. of L.R.D. 93 ; I.L.P.
Cooke, George (A.E.U.), N.U.W.C.M.
96
Coppock, Richard (A.U.B.T.W.), B.B.
of R.I.L.U. 84 ; N.O.L.C. 93
Corsor, Benjamin, Left Wing S.P. of
America, 66
Courtney, Miss K. D., E.O. of W.I.L.
35, 104
Courtney of Penwith, Lord, B.N.P.C.
32 ; N.C.F. 36
Courtney of Penwith, Lady, E.C. of
W.I.L. 35, 104
Couturier, Vaillant, C.P. (Fr.) 49;
Clart6 103
Cowen, Joseph, D.F. 16
Cox, Lucy A., Sec. N.M.W.M. 105
Coxon, W., N.C.L.C. 93
Cramp, 0. T. (N.U.R.), 79; C. of A. 78
Crawfurd, Mrs. Helen, W.P.C. 35 ;
146 INDEX OF PERSONS
E.C. of C.P.O.B. 67, 96 ; E.C. of
W.I.R., also Secretary 99;
I.C.W.P.A. 100; I.L.P.
Cromer, 11
Crossley, James, H.O.R.C. 64;
B.S.P., C.P.O.B.
Cunningham Graham, Scottish Lab.
Party 19
Cyril, Victor, Clart4 103
Dalstrom, K., 46
Daly, W.I.R. 99
Dana, Harry, 119
Daryngton, Lord, I.O.F. 130
Davidson, Morrison, D.F. 16
Davidson, Professor Thomas, Fab. 17
Davies, Emil, Fab. Res. Dep. 18;
L.P., Fab. (E.C.), 1917 Club
Davies, Miss Llewelyn, S.C.R. 101
Davies, R. J. (N.U.D.A.W.),
H. O.R.C. 64; I.L.P., L.P.
do Brouckere, L.P. (Belg.) 33
Debs, Eugene V., P.C.A. 54, 110;
F.O.R. (Am.) 110
Deer, George, E.C. of B.S.P. 33;
E. C. of C.P.G.B. 67
Delignet, 44
Desodoards, Fantin. 10
Despard, Mrs., W.I.L. 35 ; W.I.R. 99
Deutsch, Leo, 25
Dickinson, G. Lowes, 1917 Club 36
Dickinson, Sir W. H., Vice-Pres. of
I. P.S. 106
Dirba, C.P. (Am.) 56
Dobb, Maurice H., E.C. of L.R.D.
Dogadov',L' T’S.I.K. (E.C.) 88;
A. R.C.C.T.U. 88, 91
Donaldson, Canon F. L., C.S.L. 127
Dondicol, C.G.T.U. 82
Doriot, Jean, C.P. (Fr.) 49
Doty, Miss Madeleine, Sec.
W.I.L.P.F. 104
Douglas, Fred, N.U.W.C.M. 97;
C.P.G.B.
Dryer, the Rev. Oliver, Gen. Sec.
F. O.R. 106, 119
Dukes, Charles (N.U.G.W.), E.C. of
B. S.P. 33
Duncan, W., Y.C.L. 117
Dunne, William F., W.P.A. 69
Dunnico, Rev. Herbert, E.C. of
W.I.R. 98, 99 ; Sec. of I.P.S. 106,
Vice-Pres. Int. Bur. de la Paix ;
Pres. Int. Peace Scouts, 107 ;
N.O.P.W. 108 ; L.P., I.L.P., Fab.
Dunstan, Dr. Margaret, E.C. of
W.I.R. 99
Dunstan, Dr. Robert, 102 ; H.O.R.C.
64; E.C. of W.I.R. 99; S.C.R.
101 ; I.L.P.
Dutt, Rajani Palme, L.R.D. 9 8 ;
E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95
Eastman, Max, P.C.A. 64 ; F.S.R. 61
Ebert, S.P. (Ger.) 33
Ebury, G., H.O.R.C. 66
Eccarius, 12
Elbaum, D., C.P. (Am.) 66
Ellis, Havelock, K.K. 124
Elsbury, Sam (M.F.G.B.), N.M.M.
86 ; L.P., I.L.P., S.D.F., S.D.P.,
C.P.G.B.
Eramott, Lord, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Enfield, A. Honora, L.P.F. 35;
E.C. of W.I.R. 99 ; N.P.O.
Engdahl, J. L„ W.P.A. 59, 110
Engels, Friedrich, 11, 14, 15
Evans, Miss M., E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Evdokimov, TS.I.K. (E.C.), 88;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Ewer, Mrs., E.C. of W.I.R. 99
Ewer, W. N., E.C. of W.I.R., 99 ;
Foreign editor of Daily Herald
Fairchild, E. C., B.S.P. 33 ;C.W.S.D.
63 ; I.L.P., S.D.F., S.D.P., L.P.
Falk, 63
Farbman, Michael, S.C.R. 101
Faulkner, W., Articles in Patriot 94,
104
Feigin, Y.C.L. 116
Ferguson, A., E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95
Ferguson, Isaac E., C.P. (Am.) 66 ;
arrest of 58
Fimmen, Edo, I.F.T.U. 80, 87, 90 ;
W.I.R.
Findlay, A. A. H., delegate to
Russia, 1924 88 ; G.O. of T.U.O.
Fineberg, B.S.P. 33
Fisher, Victor, B.S.P. 33
Fitzgerald, M. Eleanor, 54
Flynn, 46
Flynn, Elizabeth Gurley, W.D.U.
(Am.) 82; A.C.L.U. 110 ; I.W.W.
Foot, W. T. A. (N.U.R.), N.C.L.C. 93
Foster, William Zebulon, 83 ; A.F.
of L. 28 ; I.W.W. 28, 76 ; W.P.A.
59 ; F.S.R. 61; founded T.U.E.L.
76, 82 ; A.C.L.U. 110
Fourier, his phalansteries, 10
Fox, S. Darwin, 121
Fraina, Louis, 44, 46 ; A.C.P. 56 ;
C.P. (Am.) 56
France, Anatole, Clart6 103
Franklin, Hon. Mrs., U.D.C. 34
Fribourg, 11
Friedlander, 62
INDEX OF PERSONS 147
Fries, A., 46
Frossard, 49
Frost, P. B., D.F. 16, 127
Fyfe, Hamilton (N.U.J.), 131 ; E.C.
of U.D.C. 104 ; editor of Daily
Herald 104 ; 1917 Club
Gallacher, W. (Lanark Miners’
Union), 46. 62 ; H.O.R.C. 64;
E.C. of C.P.G.B. 96, 101 ; N.M.M.
Garcia, D.F. 16
Gardiner, Rolf, 120, 121
Garvin, J. L., editor of Observer 101;
S.C.R. 101
Gasparowa, W.I.R. 99
Geddes, Patrick, K.K. 124
Gerhardsen, Einer, 63
Gerrie, George, Scottish Lab. Party
19
Gill, Hubert A., E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Gillespie, Major H. J., F.R.D. 18
Gitlow, Benjamin, Left Wing S.P.
of America, 57 ; C.L.P. of America,
67 ; arrest of 68 ; W.P.A. 69
Glasier, Bruce, I.L.P. 21, 34
Glasier, Mrs. Bruce, 98; E.C. of
W.I.L. 35 ; I.L.P., T.S., Q.
Glebov-Avilov, N. P., A.R.O.C.T.U.
89 ; delegate to England (1925)
Gobat, Rev. T. C., Chairman L.K.G.
131
Goldman, Emma (“ Red Emma ”),
A.A. 54, 68, 70
Goldsmith, S., Y.C.L. 117
Gombos, 52
Gompers, Samuel, A.F.L. 28, 76
Goode, Sir William, N.C.P.W. 108
Goode, W. T., H.O.R.C., 64
Gore, Bishop, C.S.U. 127
Gorle, Councillor F. H., N.S.P. 33
Gosling, Harry (N.T.W.F.), 79 ; 0.
of A. 78 ; T.U.C.
Gossip, Alexander (N.A.F.T.A.), 91 ;
1917 Club 36; H.O.R.C. 64;
N. C.C.L. 93; Vice-Pres. W.I.R.
99 ; I.C.W.P.A. 100 ; Pres. Brit.
S.S.S. Union
Gough, Rev. Prebendary, on
O. O.P.E.C. 132
Gould, F. J., N.S.P. 33
Grassmann, W.I.R. 97; Gen. Fed. of
Lab. (Germany)
Graziadei, 46
Green, William, 26
Gregory, J., N.C.L.C. 93
Grenfell, Harold, H.O.R.C. 64
Grey, Mary, 113
Griffuelhes, 28
Grimm, Robert, 52
Groves, Thomas, E.C. of I.P.S. 107 ;
Vice-Pres. Int. Peace Scouts, 107
Guesde, Jules, 25
Guilbeaux, A., 46 ; S.P. (Fr.) 44
Hamilton, J., Pres. N.C.L.C. 93 ;0.0.
Hamilton, Mary, E.C. of U.D.C. 104 ;
I.L.P., 1917 Club
Hannington, Wal (A.E.U.), N.M.M.
86; E.C. of C.P.G.B. 96, 101 ;
Nat. Organiser of N.U.W.C.M. 96 ;
I.C.W.P.A. 100 ; R.I.L.U.
Hapgood, Norman, 111
Harben, H. D., G.S. 30
Hardie, Keir, 17 ; I.L.P. 19 ; Scot­
tish Labour Party 20 ; editor of
Labour Leader 21 ; owned The
Miner 21 ; Labour member for
West Ham 21 ; member of L.R.C.
Hardy, George, 102; U.D.C. 34 ;
B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ; N.M.M. 85,
87 ; I.W.W.
Hargrave, John, 121, 122
Harris, J. Theodore, E.C. of
N.M.W.M. 105
Harrison, Caleb, F.S.R. 61
Harrison, William Q., 119
Hartmann, Nihilist 26
Hartmann, Dr. Jacob W., F.S.R. 61
Haye,Percival(A.E.U.), N.U.W.C.M.
96
Hayes, Emily, N.S.P. 33
Haynes, John, 119
Hayward, J. J., E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Haywood, William D., W.F.M. 28, 76
Hazell, A. P„ S.S.S.M. 113 ; S.D.F.
113
Headingley, A. S. See Adolphe
Smith
Headlam, Rev. Stuart, 127
Heath, Carl, N.P.O. 32
Helphand. See Parvus
Heltz, Max, 48
Henderson, Arthur, U.D.C. 34;
N.C.P.W. 108 ; L.P., T.U.C.
Hereford, Bishop of, S.P.L. 32
Herriot, S.P. (Fr.), 49
Hertz, Dr., Chief Rabbi, 32
Hertz, Moses, 12
Herzen, 40
Herzog, 46
Hesketh, Everard, I.C.F. 130
Hewlett, Maurice, K.K. 124
Hewlett, W., E.C. of C.P.G.B. 67;
B.B. of R.I.L.U.
Hicks, George (N.F.B.T.O.), 92, 96 ;
I.F.T.U. 87 ; Gen. Council T.U.C.
90; L.R.D. 93; P.L. 93;
T.U.U.
148 INDEX OF PERSONS
Hilkowicz, Misca, See Morris Hill-
quit
Hillman, Joseph, Pres. A.C.W.U. 82
Hillquit, Morris, alias Misca Hil­
kowicz, 15 ; E.P.F. 37 ; A.L.L.A.
37 ; P.C.A. 64, 109 ; Int. Sec. S.P.
of America, A.C.L.U.
Himmolfarb, L., Left Wing S.P. of
America 55
Hindenburg, Field-Marshal von, 48
Hird, Denis, P.L. 29 ; C.L.C. 29
Hobson, J. A., E.C. of U.D.C. 34,
104; 1917 Club 36; N.C.P.W.
108; L.P.
Hodges, Frank (S.W.M.F.), C. of A.
78 ; M.F.G.B. 79 ; I.C.F. 130
Hodgkin, Jonathan Edward, Treas.
of I.P.S. 106
Hodgson, J. F., E.C. of B.S.P. 33 ;
E.C. of O.P.G.B. 67
Hoffman, 39, 65
Holland, Canon Scott, C.S.U. 127
Holmes, Walter, E.C. of W.I.R. 99
Holst, Roland, 114
Holst, Mrs. J. Roland, C.P. (Hoi.) 61
Holt, Hamilton, A.N.C. 38;
N. U.W.C.M. 96
Homer, Harry, N.U.W.C.M. 96;
R. I.L.U., C.P.G.B.
Homer, A., N.M.M. 86; E.C. of
O. P.G.B. 95
H6mle, E., 116
Horowitz, Fanny, Left Wing S.P.
(Am.), 55
Horrabin, Winifred, P.L. 93 ; E.C.
of W.I.R. 99
Horthy, Admiral, 62
Horton, Rev. Robert, Vice-Pres. of
I.P.S. 106
Hourwich, Nicholas I., Left Wing
S. P. of America 66; C.P. of
America 66
Howe, Frederick 0., 110
Hudson, J. H. (N.U.T.), N.O.F. 35 ;
Sec. of N.C.P.W. 108; I.L.P.,
C. O..Q.
Huebsch, B. W., E.C. of A.N.C. 38
Hughes, Fred, 131
Humbert-Droz, J., 46
Hunter, A., Treas. L.K.G. 131
Hunter, David, E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Hutchinson, W. H. (A.S.E.), E.C. of
N.C.L.C., L.R.D.
Hutton, Rev. John, Vice-Pres. of
I.P.S. 106
Huysmans, Camille, L.P. (Belg.) 50;
2nd Int. 45
Hyndman, H. M., 17; Leader of
D. F. 16 ; B.S.P. 33 ; Leader of
N.S.P. 33, 68 ; death of 68
Hyndman, R. Travers, N.S.P. 33
Ignat, Y.C.L. 116
Inge, Dean, 124, 132
Inkpin, Albert, Gen. Sec. B.S.P. 33 ;
Gen. Sec. C.P.G.B. 67, 95, 101 ;
S.D.F., Hon. Pres. Komintern at
3rd Congress in Moscow
Irving, Dan, B.S.P. 33 ; S.D.F. 68
Jackson, T. A., E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95 ;
N.U.W.C.M., editor of Communist
Jacobs, Dr. Aletta, W.I.C.P.P. 38
Jacobs, T., 23
Jansen, 46
Jaurds, 25
Johansen, P. Moe, 63
John, E. T., Pres. N.C.P.W. 108
Johnson, O. C., 66
Johnstone, Butler, D.F. 16
Jones, Jack. See Jones, Coun. J. J.
Jones, Councillor J. J. (N.U.G.W.),
N.S.P. 33 ; H.O.R.C. 64 ; S.D.F.
68
Jones, Morgan, E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Jordan, Dr. David Starr, P.C.A. 64
Jorgenson, O., 46
Joss, William, E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95
Jouhaux, L., I.F.T.U. 80, 87, 90
Jowett, Frederick W., E.C. of I.L.P.
21 ; U.D.C. 34
Jowitt, Miss Moya, 121 ; I.L.Y. 120 ;
K.K. 123, 124
Joynes, J. L., D.F. 16, 127
Jung, Hermann, 12
Kaledine, General, 41
Kameneva, W.I.R. 99
Kamenev, alias Rosenfeld, C. of A. 78
Kautsky, Karl, S.D.P. of Germany
25, 48
Karolyi, Count, 42
Karosses, C.P. (Am.), 56
Katayama, Sen, 45
Katterfeld, L. E., C.L.P. (Am.) 57
Kay, G., B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84
Kennedy, Rev. G. A. Studdert, 132 ;
I.C.F. 128, 130
Kennedy, Tom, Gen. Sec. S.D.F. 68
Kent, J., 23
Keracher, John, 56
Kerensky, 33, 41 ; government of 42
Keynes, J. M., S.C.R. 101
King, Joseph, 1917 Club 36 ; S.C.R.
101 ; L.P., I.L.P.
Kingsley, Charles, 15, 126
Kirchwey, Dr. George, A.N.C. 38
Kirk, Rev. P .T .R ., 127 ;I.C.F. 129,
130
INDEX OF PERSONS 149
Kirkwood, David, H.O.R.C. 64;
Vice-Pres. W.I.R. 99 ; I.L.P.
Kitz, Frank, 17
Klatt, Fritz, 121
Klein, Miss Ella, E.C. of W.I.R. 99
Klinger, G., 44
Klishko, N., W.I.R. 98, 99
Kohen, Alex, A.C.W.U. 82
Kollontai, Madame Alexandra, 53
Komintern, see 3rd Internationale
Kopnagel, S., 56
Kornilov, General, 41
Koznekow, Alexandre, 63
Krassin, 78
Krestinski, W.I.R. 97 ; Repres. All
Russ. Relief Committee in Berlin
Kropotkine, Prince, 26, 27, 40;
Kropotkine Anarchists, 27, 70
Krumbein, Charles, C.L.P. (Am.) 57
Kun, Bela, 62, 69
Lagardelle, 28
Langdon Davies, B. N., U.D.C. 34 ;
N.C.O. 36 ; N.C.C.L. 36 ; I.L.P.,
1917 Club
Lannung, Hermod, founder of I.L.Y.
120
Lansbury, George, 95, 102 ; D.F.
16 ; N.C.C.L. 36 ; H.O.R.C. 64 ;
Vice-Pres. W.I.R. 97, 98, 99 ;
Chairman N.M.W.M. 105 ; Vice-
Pres. Int. Peace Scouts ; and
N.C.P.W. 108; and I.C.F. 128;
L.K.G. 131 ; I.L.P., C.S.L.
Lansbury, Miss Nellie, E.C. of W.I.R.
99
Larkin, James (leader I.T.G.W.U.
24), Left Wing S.P. of America
65 ; C.L.P. (Am.) 57 ; arrest of
68 ; C.P.I. 71 ; W.I.R. 99
Larkin, Peter, I.W.U. 71
Lasker, Bruno, 121
Laski, Harold, A.C.L.U. 124
Lavroff, 40
Lawrence, Mrs. Pethick, 62 ; W.I.L.
35 ; E.P.F. 37 ; K.K. 124;
C.W.S.D., I.L.P., 1917 Club, T.S.
Lazarevitch, Israel. See Parvus
Lazzari, It. S.P. (Soviet Faction) 50
Lawlor, W.I.R. 99
Leach, Agnes Brown, A.C.L.U. 110
Leaf, Miss Emily, E.C. of W.I.L.
104
Ledebour, 39 ; W.I.R. 99
Lee, H. W., N.S.P. 33 ; S.D.F. 68
Lees-Smith, H. B., E.C. of U.D.C.
104; L.P.
Legien, Karl, 28
Lehane, C., Gen. Sec. S.P.G.B.
Lehman, George, Left Wing 8.P. of
America 55
Leipart, Th., I.F.T.U. 87
Lenin, Nicolai, 39, 41, 44, 46, 49,
61, 62, 54, 66, 73, 83 ; H.O.R.C.
63 ; and S. Pankhurst, 66, 68;
and A.A. 54
Leon, Daniel de, S.L.P. (America)
14 ; I.W.W. 29
Lessner, 12
Lepse, I. I., A.R.C.C.T.U. 88, 89;
delegate to England (1925) ;
TS.I.K. (E.C.), 88
Levin, Samuel, A.C.W.U. 82
Levy, P., 46
Lewis, P. H„ 116
Libby, Frederick J., I ll
Lichfield, Bishop of, C.S.U. 127 ;
Vice-Pres. I.C.F. 130
Liebermann, E., W.D.U. (Am.) 82
Liebknecht, Karl, 49, 114; Spart.
25, 39, 48
Liebknecht, Wilhelm, leader of
S.D.P. of Germany 25
Lincoln, Bishop of, C.E.P.L. 32
Lindgren, Edward I., 65 ; C.L.P. of
America 57
Lindner, S., 27
Linfield, F. O., Troas. of N.C.P.W.
108
Lipnitski, 52
Lismer, E., 84
Litvinov, alias Finkelstein, 53
Llewellyn, F. W., E.C. of B.S.P. 33
Lochner, Louis P., E.P.F. 37 ;
A.L.L.A. 37; W.I.C.P.P. 37 ;
Sec. P.C.A. 109; First Am.
C.D.T.P.
Lcsber, N.M.M. 86
Long, Rev. W., E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Longuet, Jean, 44, 49 ; grandson of
Marx 25
Lore, Ludwig, C.L.P. of America 67 |
W.P. of America 59
Loriot, 49
Losovsky, A. (Solomon Abramovitch
Dridzo), 89 ; R.I.L.U. (Gen. Sec.)
81, 88; TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88 ;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Louis, Marguerite, E.C. of N.M.W.M.
105
Lovell, Bob, I.C.W.P.A. 100, 101
Lovestone, Jay, W.P.A. 59 ; C.P.
of America 56
Ludendorff, General, 43, 65
Lumberg, Hyman, A.C.W.U. 82
Lutovinov, TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Luxemburg, Rosa, 49 ; Spart. 48
Lvoff, Prince, 41
150 INDEX OF PERSONS
Macassoy, Sir Lynden, I.C.F. 130
Macdonald, James, D.F. 16
Macdonald, James Ramsay, 17;
I.L.P. 21, 34; Sec. L.R.C. 21;
U.D.C. 34 ; 1917 Club 36;
C.W.S.D. 62, 63
MacLaine, W. (A.E.U.), 46 ; E.O. of
3rd Xnt. 44 ; H.O.R.O. 64 ; E.C.
ofW .I.R. 99; B.S.P.
Maclean, Sir Donald, Vice-Pres. of
I.P.S. 106
Maclean, John, 64, 65 ; B.S.P. 33 ;
“ Bolshevik Consul ” in Glasgow 65
Maclean, Neil, H.O.R.O. 64 ; E.C. of
W.I.R. 99 ; I.L.P.
MacManus, Arthur, 62 ; S.L.P. 22 ;
H.O.R.O. 65 ; Chairman O.P.G.B.
66, 67, 69, 95, 101, 102
Macmillan, Chrystal, W.I.C.P.P. 38
Madsen, A., 46
Maeterlinck, Maurice, K.K. 124
Magnes, Rabbi Judah L., First Am.
C.D.T.P. 38; P.O.A. 54, 109 ;
A.O.L.TJ.
Malatesta, 26
Malon, Benoit, 12
Malone, Lieut.-Colonel Cecil John
L’Estrange, H.O.R.O. 64 ; E.O. of
C.P.O.B. 67, 69
Manchester, Bishop of, and N.O.P.W.
108 ; I.C.F. 130
Mander, A. E., H.O.R.O. 64
Mann, Tom, 62, 67, 86, 91 j S.D.F.
16 ; I.L.P. 21 ; I.S.L. 30;
H. O.R.O. 64; E.O. of R.I.L.U.
in Moscow 81 ; B.B. of R.I.L.U.
84; Synd. 85; N.M.M. 85;
I. C.W.P.A. 100
Manus, Rosa, W.I.C.P.P. 38
Marat, in Soho 16
Marchlevsky, U., 46
Marimmpetri, A. D., A.C.W.U. 82
Mariovitz, Lazarus, A.C.W.U. 82
Marsden, Robert, 32
Martens, Ludwig
Martov, 25, 42
Marty, Andr6, F.C.P. 49
Marx, Eleanor, S.D.F. 16 ; S.L. 17 ;
and I.L.P. 19
Marx, Karl, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19,
25, 43 ; and Communist Manifesto
11, 126; and 1st Internationale
11 ; and Fenians 24
Marx, Madeleine, ClartA 103 ; W.I.R.
Mason, Rev. H. O .; Hon. See. C.C.
127
Massingham, H. W., N.C.C.L. 36
Masterman, Charles, 124
Maurer, James H., P.C.A. 54;
A.C.L.U. 110
Maurice, C. E., I.A.P.A. 32 ; S.P.L.
32
Maurice, Major-Gen. F„ Vice-Chair­
man I.C.F. 130
Maurice, Frederick, 15, 126
May, H. J., Chairman E.C. of W.I.R.
99 ; S.C.R. 101
Mayer, Anton, 121 ; R.I.L.U. 81
Mayne, Stanley, 114
Mazzini, 16
McBride, W.I.R. 99
M’Carthy, Justin, D.F. 16
McDermott, Y.C.L. 117
Mehring, Franz, Spart. 48
Mellor, William, Sec. F.R.D. 18 ;
G.8. 30 ; news editor of Daily
Herald (1924), E.C. of C.P.G.B.
Melnichansky, G. I., TS.I.K. (E.C.)
88 ; A.R.C.C.T.U. 88, 89 ; member
of delegation to England (1925)
Mercer, Rev. F. E., I.C.F. 128
Mertens, C., I.F.T.U. 80, 87, 91
Meyer, E., 46
Mikhailov, A.R.C.C.T.U. 89; dele­
gate to England (1925), TS.I.K.
Millar, J. P. M„ N.C.L.O. 93;
N.O.P. Plebs League
Millerand, 25
Mills, J. E. (A.E.U.), H.O.R.O. 64
Mirabeau, 32
Misiano, W.I.R. 99
Mislig, Michael, R.S.F. 55
Moll, Miss M. L„ Sec. F.O.R. 106
Montague, F„ E.O. of S.D.F. 68 ;
I.L.P.
Montefiore, Mrs. Dora B., 62 ; E.O.
of B.S.P. 33 ; C.W.S.D. 63 ; E.O.
of C.P.G.B. 67 ; E.O. of W.I.R. 99
Morel, E. D. (Edmond Morel-de-
Ville), 132; origin 63; I.L.P.
34; E.O. of U.D.C. 34, 104;
editor of Foreign Affairs, 34, 104 ;
1917 Club 36 ; N.P.O.
Morgan, D.F. 16
Morland, Harold J., N.M.W.M. 105
Morris, G. C., K.K. 123
Morris, William, D.F. 16; S.D.F.
16; S.L. 17; editor of Communist;
and Newsfrom Nowhere
Moscheles, Felix, I.A.P.A.
Mosley, Oswald, Chairm m of
N.C.P.W. 108; L.P.
Most, Johann, imprisoned in Eng­
land 26 ; Freiheit 27
Muck-Lamberty, Herr, and Nudity
Movement 121
Munzenberg,Willi, Director of W.I.R.
97 99
Murphy, J. T. (A.E.U.), S.L.P. 22 ;
E.C. of C.P.G.B. 67, 95, 101; E.C-
INDEX OF PERSONS 151
of R.I.L.U. 81 1 B.B. of B.I.L.U.
84 ; E.O. of 3rd Int.
Murray, Charles, D.F. 16
Murray, Professor Gilbert, and
N.C.P.W. 108; Chairman of L.N.U.
Murray, James, D.F. 16
Mussolini, Benito, 60, 90 ; I.S.U. 33
Muste, A. J., 119 ; and Intercol­
legiate Socialist Society 16 ; Amal­
gamated Textile Workers 82
Muyne, Gust, 119
Myers, Tom, H.O.B.O. 64; L.P.,
I.L.P.
Nevinson, Henry W., 1917 Club 37 ;
K.K. 124 ; N.L.O.
Newbold, Horace, N.U.W.C.M. 96
Newbold, J. T. Walton, L.R.D. 93 ;
Vice-Pres. W.I.R. 98, 99 ; Fab.,
I.L.P., Plebs League, O.P.G.B.
Newbold, Mrs. Marjorie, E.O. of
W.I.R. 99
Newboult, Margaret, E.C. of
N.M.W.M. 106
Newman, Sir Robert, I.O.F. 130
Nicolaieff, 63
Nightingale, Rev. Thomas, and
N.C.P.W. 108
Nikon, M., 46
Nissen, Eugene, 63
Noel, Rev. Conrad, vicar of Tharted,
127 ; C.S.L. 127 ; C.C. 127
Nogin, R.I.L.U. 81
Norman, 0. H., N.O.F. 32, 36 ; 1917
Club
Norman Angell League, 32
Nosowitsky, Jacob, 68
O’Connor, T. P., Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Odell, Mrs. George T., W.I.L. in
America 111
Odger, 11
O'Flaherty, Liam, C.P.I. 71
O’Grady, J. (N.A.F.T.A.), Vice-Pres.
W.I.R. 99 ; T.U.C.
OgareS, 40
Olivier, Sydney, Fab. 18; L.P.,
N.L.C.
Ollenhauer, E., 118, 119
Orchard, Rev. Dr., F.O.R. 35
Orlandez, R.I.L.U. 81
Oudegeest, J., I.F.T.U. 80, 87, 91
Overstraeten, Will Van, Belg. C.P, 50
Owen, Robert, 10, 15, 126
Owen, Will J., F.G. 70
Pahl, Walter, Nudity Movement 121
Pankhurst, Sylvia, 46, 80, 116;
C.W.S.D. 63 j and Lenin 66 ;
arrest of 68 ; and 4th Inter. 69 ;
W.S.F., W.C.M.
Parmoor, Lord, 132 j and N.C.P.W.
108
Parmoor, Lady, E.C. of W.I.L. 104 ;
N.C.P.W. 108
Partridge, T., 113
Parvus (Israel Lazarevitch Help-
hand), 41, 43
Paul, Cedar (Mrs.), P.L. 93 ; I.L.P.,
C.P.G.B. ; co-editor of Proletcult
Paul, William, 102 ; S.L.P. 22 ; E.C.
of C.P.G.B. 67 ; P.L., L.P., editor
of Socialist, Communist Review
Peacock, Arthur, F.B.Y.M. 122
Pearce, A., Y.C.L. 117
Pease, E. R., 30 ; Hon. Sec. Fab.
Soc.
Peck, W. G., 131
Peckover, Miss P. H., Vice-Pres. of
I.P.S. 106
Peet, George, 84 ; H.O.R.C. 64
Peile, Helen, E.C. of N.M.W.M. 105
Penrose, the Hon. Mrs. J. Doyle,
E.O. of I.P.S. 107
Pepper, John. See Pogany
Pemerstorfer, A.S.D.P. 33
Pestana, 46
Petroff, B.S.P. 33
Phillips, Dr. Marion, 102 ; U.D.O. 34 j
L.P., editor of Labour Woman
Phillips, Rev. Thomas, Vice-Pres. of
I.P.S. 106, 107
Pickard, W.I.R. 99
Plasunov, Y.C.L. 116
Platton, Fritz, 41, 44, 52; See. 8.D.P.
of Switzerland 61
Plekhanov, George V., 26, 42 ;
leader of Mensheviks 33
Plumb, Glenn E., A.O.L.U. 110
Plymouth, the Suffragan Bishop of,
Vice-Pres. of I.P.S. 106
Pogany, Joseph, alias John Pepper,
W.P.A. 69
Pollitt, Harry, boilermaker, 91 ;
B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ; N.M.M. 85 ;
L.R.D. 93 ; E.C. of C.P.G.B. 96,
101; 1.0/W.P.A. 100; editor of AU
Power, L.P., T.U.C.
Polovtsev, Dr. V. N., E.O. of W.I.R.
99
Ponsonby, Arthur, 63 ; I.L.P. 34 ;
E.C. of U.D.C. 34, 104; 1917
Club 36
Porteous, Miss Margaret, F.B.Y.M.
122
Postgate, R. W., P.L. 93 ; C.P.G.B.,
editor of The Communist
Pouget, Emile, 28
PERSONS
152 INDEX OF
Poulton, E. L., Gen, Council Brit.
T.U.C. 90
Pressemane, 49
Price, M. Philips, U.D.C. 34 j P.L.
93 ; I.L.P., Berlin Corresp. Daily
Herald
Prooth, M„ N.U.W.C.M. 102
Prothoro, J., Y.C.L. 117
Proudhon, 26, 54
Pugh, Arthur, T.U.U. 90; Pres.
T.U.C. (1926) ; Chairman Nat.
Joint Counc. T.U.C. and L.P.
Purcell, A. A. (N.A.F.T.A.), bi, 85,
96 ; C.P.G.B. 67 ; C. of A. 78 ;
B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ; I.F.T.U. 87 ;
delegate to Russia 1924, 88, 89 ;
Gen. Coun. T.U.C. 88, 90 ; Hon.
Pres. N.C.L.C. 93; Vice-Pres.
W.I.R. 98, 99
Quelch, Harry, S.D.F. 16
Quelch, Tom, 44, 46, 66 ; N.M.M. 86
Rabbi, the Chief, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Rabinovitch, Catherine, S.C.R. 101
Rabinovitch, Philip, E.C. of W.I.R.
98, 99
Radek, 83
Rai, Lajpat, I.C.W.P.A. 100
Rakoszy, 44, 46, 52
Ramsay, Y.C.L. 117
Rand School of Social Science, 15,
55, 57, 82
Rappoport, 49
Ravachol, 26
Recht, Charles, 109
Reckitt, Maurice B., L.K.G. 130
Record, Charles, Soc. Socialist Chris­
tians 131
Redfem, Y.C.L. 117
Reed, John, 46 ; O.L.P. of America
67
Reeves, Mrs. Pember, F.R.D. 18
Reinstein, Boris, 55
Renaud, Jean, C.P. (Fr.) 49
Renaudel, S.P. (Fr.) 33
Renner, A.S.D.P. 33
Reynaud, W.I.R. 99
Richards, Rev. L., F.O.R. 35
Richardson, T„ E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Ripon, Bishop of, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Roberts, G. H., I.L.P. 21
Robertson, J. M., 32 ; Y.C.L. 117
Robertson, Dr. Stirling, Scottish
Labour Party 19
Robinson, Mrs. Margaret B. L., 121,
127 ; ardent patriot 119
Rocker, Rudolf, 27
Roebuck, 0. M., E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95 ;
Y.C.L. 117
Rosenberg, 68
Rosenblum, Frank, A.C.W.U. 82
Rosemblum, Hella, 115
Rosenfeld, Morris, 115
Rosenfeld. See Kamenev
Rossmer, A., 44, 46
Rothstein, E., Y.C.L. 117
Rowntree, Arnold, N.C.F. 35
Roy, 46
Royden, Maude, F.O.R. 35 ; W.I.L.
35 ; 1917 Club 37
Rudniamsky, 46
Rudzutak, J. E„ TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88 ;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Ruskin, Y.C.L. 117
Russell, Archibald, S.S.S.M. 113
Russell, Bertrand, U.D.C. 34 ;
C.W.S.D. 63
Rust, C.P.G.B. 101 ; Y.C.L. 117
Rutgers, S. J., 55
Ruthenberg, Charles E., C.P. of
America 56; arrest of 68;
W.P.A. 59
Ruygers, Francine, 124
Rykov, A., TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Sadoul, Jacques, 44, 46; E.C. of
3rd Internt.
Saklatvala, Shapurji, 116, 128 ; de­
nounces the Empire 91 ; E.C. of
W.I.R. 99; I.C.W.P.A. 100;
1917 Club, C.P.G.B.
Samuelson, 46
Sassenbach, J., I.F.T.U. 87
Saxe-Meynell, Mrs. Hilda, E.C. of
W.I.R. 99
Scheflo, M., 52
Scheidemann, 33 ; S.D.P. of Ger­
many, 25, 48
Scheu, Andreas, S.D.F. 16 ; S.L. 17
Schlesinger, Benjamin (I.L.G.W.U.),
82; P.C.A. 64; W.D.U.
Schlossberg, Joseph (A.C.W.U.), 82 ;
P.C.A. 109
Schmidt, V. V., TS.I.K. (E.C.) 88 ;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Schwartz, C.P. (Am.) 56
Schwimmer, Madame Rosika, E.P.F.
37 ; W.I.C.P.P. 37
Semard, F.C.P., 49
Seniushkin, TS.I.K. 88 ;
A.R.C.C.T.U. 88
Serrati, D. M., 46 ; It. S.P. (Soviet
Faction) 50
Shaftesbury, Lord, 15, 126
Sharp, Evelyn (N.U.J.), 1917 Club
INDEX OF PERSONS 153
37 ; E.O. of W.I.R. 99 ; W.I.L.,
K.K., 1917 Club
Shatzkin, Lazar, Y.C.L. 116
Shaw, Y.C.L. 117
Shaw, Frod (A.S.E.), E.C. of B.S.P.
33 ; H.O.R.C. 64 ; E.C. of
C.P.G.B. 67 ; E.C. of U.D.C. 104
Shaw, George Bernard, 30 ; Fab. 18 ;
Chairman F.R.D. 18 ; L.R.D. 76 ;
S.C.R. 101
Shaw, Lord, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S. 106
Shaw, Tom, 46; Sec. 2nd Inter­
nationale
Sheffick, 46
Shefflo, 46
Shelly, Rebecca, and A.N.C. 38;
P.C.A. 54, 109
Sheppard, Rev. H. R. L., I.C.F. 130
Shields, J„ Y.C.L. 117
Sima, George, C.L.O. 29 ; S.D.P. 29 ;
I.L.P. 29
Simon, Sir John, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Simpson, A. Noel, E.C. of N.M.W.M.
106
Simpson, R., E.C. of I.P.S. 107
Sinn Fein, 71
Skinner, J. Allen, 96
Slesser, Sir Henry, 132 ; L.K.G. 131 ;
E.C. of I.C.F. (1924)
Smarodin, Y.C.L. 116
Smart, Russell, B.S.P. 33
Smillie, Robert (M.F.G.B.) 62 ; I.L.P.
21 ; N.C.C.L. 36 ; H.O.R.C. 64
Smith, Adolphe, 13, 43, 45, 68 ;
S.D.F. 16 ; B.S.P. 33 ; N.S.P. 33
Smith, Constance, I.C.F. 130
Smith, Edward J., L.P.F. 35
Smith, Herbert (M.F.G.B.) 79, 90,
95 ; delegate to Russia 1924 88
Smith, H„ Y.C.L. 117
Smythe, Nora, 69
Sneevliet, H., C.P. of Holland 51
Snowden, Philip, 17 ; I.L.P. 21 ;
N.C.F. 35; C.W.S.D. 62, 63 ;
Vice-Pres. of I.P.S. 106; and
N.C.P.W. 108
Snowden, Mrs. Philip, W.I.L. 35 ;
W.P.C. 35 ; 1917 Club 37 ; U.D.C.
104; and N.C.P.W. 108
Sorel, Georges, 28
Sorge, S. A., 14, 17
Spiridinova, Maria, 40
Spoke, Father John Comer, 131
Spooner. Lysander, 26
Spoor, Ben, H.O.R.C. 64 ; E.C. of
I.P.S. 107 ; L.P., U.D.C., 1917
Club, Sec. N.P.C.
Stacy, Rev. Paxil, L.K.G. 130
Stamm-Ponsen, Mrs., C.P. (Hoi.) 61
Stang, Emil, 63
Starr, Kathleen, P.L. 93 ; E.C. of
W.I.R. 99
Starr, Mark, E.C. of P.L. 93 ; E.C.
of N.C.L.C. 93 ; 1917 Club, Brit.
League Esperantist Socialists
Steinhardt, K., 46
Steinhart, 52
Stephen, Adrian, 36
Sterringa, C.P. of Holland, 51
Stewart, James, 117 ; S.L.P.,
C.P.G.B., E.O. of Y.C.L., Edit.
Young Rebel, Young Communist
Stewart, Robert, E.C. of C.P.G.B.
67, 95, 102 ; E.C. of W.I.R. 99 ;
Hon. Sec. of Irish branch of W.I.R.
■Stilson, I., 66
Stocker, R., I.C.W.P.A. 100
Stockton, Sir Edwin, I.C.F. 130
Stokes, John, N.S.P. 33
Stokes, Rose Pastor, 55; W.P.A.
59 ; F.S.R. 61
Stoklitzky, Alexander, C.P. of
America, 44, 56 ; A.C.P. 55 ; R.S.F.
Straker, W., Vice-Pres. W.I.R. 99 ;
M.F.G.B.
Strickland, Sir Walter, F.G. 70
Stromer, 46
Sturgkh, Count, 52
Swales, A. B. (A.E.U.), 96 ; C. of A.
78 ; T.U.C. (President), 88, 90;
I.L.P.
Swann, N. E. Egerton, L.K.G. 130
Swanwick, Mrs. H. M. ; E.C. of
U.D.C. 34, 104 ; Pres. W.I.L. 35;
1917 Club 36 ; and N.C.P.W. 108
Tagore, Rabindranath, K.K. 124
Tanner, Jack (A.E.U.), 44 ; B.B. of
R. I.L.U. 84; I.W.W.
Tapsell, W., Y.C.L. 117
Taylor, Mrs. G. R. S., G.S. 30
Taylor, Helen, D.F. 16
Tawney, R. H., E.C. of Fab. 101;
S. C.R. 101 ; W.E.A.
Tcheidze, 41
Tchernov, 40
Tetley, Arthur, 119
Thomas, Albert, S.P. (Fr.) 33
Thomas, J. H. (N.U.R.), 128 ; Pres.
I.F.T.U. 78, 80, 87 ; L.S.I.
Thomas, Rev. Norman, F.O.R. 38
Thorn, J. D., N.M.M. 86; I.C.W.P.A.
100
Thorne, Will, S.D.F. 16j 68 ; N.S.P.
33 ; Gen. Council Brit. T.U.C. 90 ;
indicts E. D. Morel 34
Thorndike, Sybil, S.C.R. 101
Tillett, Ben, 96; S.D.F. 16 ; founder
of Labour Union of Bradford 20 ;
154 INDEX OF PERSONS
stood for Bradford 21 ; delegate
to Russia 1924 88, 89; Gen.
Council Brit. T.U.C. 90
Tinkler, Ida J., Sec. N.M.W.M. 105
Tolain, 11
Toller, W.I.R. 99
Tolstoi, 40
Toman, K., 48
Tomski, Michael (Joseph Izbitsky),
92 ; A.R.C.C.T.U. (Pres.) 81, 88.
89, 90 ; led delegation to England
in 1925 91 ; presented with gold
watch by T.U.C. 91
Townsend, D.F. 16
Townshend, Mre., G.S. 30
Tranmael, Martin, Sec. L.P. (Nor.)
52
Treint, C.P. (Fr.) 49
Trepoff, General, 25
Trevelyan, Charles, 63 ; I.L.P. 34 ;
E.C. of U.D.C. 34, 104; 1917
Club 36 ; and N.O.P.W. 108
Trevelyan, Mrs. C. P., E.C. of
W.I.L. 35
Troelstra, S.D.A.P. of Holland 50
Trotsky (Lev Davidovitch Bronstein),
25, 41, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 52, 54 ;
H.O.R.C. 63 ; and A.A. 54
Truro, Bishop of, Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.
106
Tschaikowsky, 40
Tucker, Benjamin R., 26, 27
Turati, S.P. (It.) 25, 50
Turner, Ben., 90 ; Vice-Pres. Int.
Peace Scouts 107
Turner, Mrs. Beth, E.C. of C.P.G.B.
95
Turner, John, delegate to Russia
1924 89
Tywerowsky, Oscar, Russ. S.F. 65
Van der Glas, C.P. of Holland 51
Vandervelde, Belg. L.P. 33, 60
Van Lakerveld, C.P. of Holland 61
Van Leuven, 46
Van Overstraoten, Will, Belg. C.P.
50
Van Ravestyn, S.D.P. of Holland 50 ;
C.P. of Holland 61
Varga, 46
Varley, Julia, Gen. Council Brit.
T.U.C. 90
Vaughan, George, Left Wing S.P. of
America 55
Villard, Mrs. Henry, First Am.
C.D.T.P. 38
Vincent, Charles R., 113
Visser, L. L. H., C.P. of Holland 51
Viviani, 25
Vorovsky, V., 44
Vrooman, Walter, R.Col. 29
Wagenknecht, A., Ex. Seo. C.L.P. of
America 57
Wake, Egerton, I.L.P. 34
Wakeman, John, F.G. 70
Watcher, J., 46
Wales, Archbishop of, Pres, of I.C.F.
129
Walker, R. B., Gen. Council Brit.
T.U.C. 90 ; C. of A. 78
Wallas, Graham, Fab. 18
Walsh, Frank P. 110
Ward, Albert, E.C. of B.S.P. 33
Wardman, G. W„ 131
Watering, E. V., E.C. of N.M.W.M.
105
Watkins, Nat, 91 ; R.I.L.U. 81, 102;
Organising Secretary N.M.M. 85,
86, 87 ; E.C. of C.P.G.B. 95
Watson, W. F„ H.O.R.C. 65
Watts, A. A., 113; E.C. of B.S.P.
33 ; E.C. of C.P.G.B. 67 ; Origina­
tor of S.S.S. Movement
Watts, F. C., 23
Watts, Hunter, B.S.P. 33 ; N.S.P. 33
Weardalo, Lord, N.P.C. 32
Webb, Sidney, 30, 32; Fab. 18;
F.R.D. 18, 19
Webb, Mrs., F.R.D. 18, 19 ; 8.C.R.
101 ; Fab.
Webster, J. G„ N.S.P. 33
Wedgwood, Josiah, 1917 Club 37 ;
H.O.R.C. 64 ; O. of A. 78 ; I.L.P.,
T.U.C.
Wegner, Arnim T., 121
Weinstein, Gregory, 65
Weiss, Charles, L.P.F. 35
Wellcock, Wilfred, E.C. of N.M.W.M.
105
Wells, H. G„ Fob. 18 ; S.O.R. 101 ;
K.K. 124 ; 1917 Club
Welsh, Francis Ralston, 111
West, Julius, Secretary F.R.D. 18
Westminster Abbey, Canon of, 106
Weston, 11
Wheatley, John, 95 ; L.P., I.L.P.
Wheeler, George, N.U.W.O.M. 96
Whitehead, Edgar T., Sec. W.I.R.
98 ; Seo. 1st British Communist
Party
Whitehouse, J. Howard, K.K. 124
Whiting, Councillor A., N.S.P. 33
Wicks, H. M., C.P. (Am.) 66
Wilker, Karl, 121
Wilkinson, Ellen, 84; B.B. of
R.I.L.U. 84; P.L. 93; E.C. of
W.I.R. 99; C.P.G.B., Workers
C’tee. of R.I.L.U. in Moscow, re­
turns from Moscow in 1921 81
INDEX OF PERSONS 155
Williams, Dr. Ethel, E.O. of W.I.L.
104
Williams, John, D.F. 16
Williams, Robert (N.T.W.F.), 62,
64, 79, 81, 96, 128 ; N.C.O.L. 36 ;
C. of A. 78 ; B.B. of R.I.L.U. 84 ;
I.L.P., H.O.R.C., Dir. Daily
Herald
Williams, V., B. B. of R.I.L.U. 84
Willis, F., H.O.R.O. 65 j E.O. of
O.P.G.B. 67
Wilson, D., Y.C.L. 117
Wilson, Havelock, 63
Wilson, J. H., M.P. for Middles­
brough, 21
Wilson, Theodora Wilson, E.O. of
N.M.W.M. 105 ; I.L.P., W.I.L.
Windsor, Walter, E.O. of I.P.S. 107 ;
Vice-Pres. of Int. Peace Scouts 107
Winberg, 46
Winiteky, Harry M., O.P. of America
56 ; arrest of 58
Winston, James, H.O.R.O. 64
Wintringham —, C.P.G.B. 101
Wise, E. F., 132 ; S.O.R. 101
Wise, Mrs., S.C.R. 101
Wise, Rabbi Stephen, E.O. of A.N.C.
38
Wolfe, Bertram D., C.P. (Am.) 56
Wolfe, L. L., Left Wing S.P. (Am.)
55
Wolff, 12
Wolfstein, R., 46
Woodifield, Robert, and 0.0. 127
Woolf, Leonard S., F.R.D. 19 ; 1917
Club 37 ; S.C.R. 101
Woolley, E., Y.C.L. 117
Woolwich, Bishop of, I.C.F. 130
Wright, W., E.C. of I.P.S. 107 }
Vice-Pres. Int. Peace Scouts 107
Wyneken, Gustave, 121
Wynkoop, D., 46 ; D.C. 44 ; S.D.P.
of Holland 50 ; C.P. of Holland 51
Wyonopsky, 8., 82
Yarotsky, V. Y„ A.R.C.C.T.U. 89
York, Archbishop of, Pres, of I.C.F.
129
Young, George, Gen. Council Brit.
T.U.C. 90
Young, H., Y.O.L. 117
Zaaier, De, 51, 114
Zalewsky. See Abramovitch
Zalkind, Dr. M„ F.G. 70
Zangwill, Israel, 64 ; U.D.C. 34
Zassulitch, Vera, 25
Zetkine, Clara, 49; Spart. 48;
W.I.R. 97, 99 ; E.C. of 3rd
Internationale
Zinoviev, G. E. (Ovse Gershon
Aronovitch Radomisilsky), 41, 44,
46, 47, 53, 68, 75, 99; letter to
I.W.W. 68, 73; overtures to
I.W.W. 74 ; Pres, of I.K.K.I. 74.
96
Note.—The real namos of Parvus, Trotsky and Zinoviev are given correctly
in brackets in above Index and not quite correctly in Text, pages 41 and
44. Apfelbaum is one of Zinoviev’s pseudonyms.
On page 113 reference is made to Bristol Socialist Sunday Society. This
should read Bristol Socialist Society.
GENERAL INDEX
“ Adamites,” 121
Allgomoiner Deutscher Arbeiter
Verein, 14
Allgemeine Deutsche gewerkschaft-
bund, 89
Alliance Sociale D6mocratique. See
Social Democratic Alliance
All Power, organ of B.B. of B.I.L.U.,
85
All Russian Central Council of Trade
Unions, 88, 89, 90 ; conference of,
in Moscow, 81
All Russian Congress of Peasants, 41
All Russian Congress of Trade
Unions, 81
All Russian Co-operative Society
(Arcos), 98, 101
Amalgamated Clothing Workers’
Union (Amer.), 82
Amalgamated Textile Workers
(Amer.), 82
Amerioa, early Socialism in, 13
American Anarchist Federated Com­
mune Soviets, 64
American Association for the Re­
cognition of the Irish Republic, 72
American Civil Liberties Union, 110,
119
Amerioan Federation of Labour, 28,
44, 74, 82 ; Left Wing of, 76
American Labor Alliance, 68
American League to Limit Arma­
ments, 37, 110
American Neutral Conference, 38
American Peace Society, 37
American Socialist Society, 15
American Union Against Militarism,
37, 110
Amsterdam Internationale. See
International Federation of Trado
Unions
Anarchism, 12 ; chap, iii ; origin of,
26 ; in America, 26; in England,
27 ; spirit of, 27
Anarchist Communism, in England,
27, 69 ; in America, 54
Anarchists, French, 26; Russian,
26, 42 ; Italian, 26; American,
26, 63 ; English, 27
Anarchist Soviet Bulletin, 54
Anarcho-Syndicalism, 82
Anglo-Russian Trade Union Unity
Committee, 89
Anti-Parliamentary Communist Fe­
deration, 69, 71
Anti-War Council of Holland, 37
Arbeiderbladet, organ of Communists
of Norway, 53
Arbitrate First Bureau, 109
Austria, Bolshevism in, 62
Avanti, organ of It. S.P., 60
Awakening Magyars, 52
Babouvistes, 10
Bakunin House, 69
Balkan Socialist Federation, 44
Band of Peace Union, Comrades of
Peace, 32, 107
Belgian Labour Party, 33, 44
Belgium, Bolshevism in, 60
“ Black Friday,” 79
Blast, The, organ of A.A., 54
Bolsheviks, 10, 25, 40
Bolshevik Consul (John Maclean), 64
Bolshevism, chap, vi, 62 ; in Great
Britain, 62 ; in France, 48; in
Germany, 48; world, 48 ; in
Italy, 49 ; in Holland, 50; in
Belgium, 50 ; in Switzerland, 51 ;
in Austria, 52 ; in Hungary, 52 ;
in Scandinavia, 52 ; in America,
53 ; in Ireland, 71
Bond van Kommunistische Stryd on
Propaganda Clubs, 51
Bridgman Convention, 83
Bristol Socialist Society, 113
British Boys’and Girls’ Peace Scouts,
107
British Communist Party, 1st, 66
British delegation to Russia, 1924.
See Russia.
British National Peace Congress, 32
British Socialist Party, 33, 62, 66
British Socialist Sunday School Com­
mittee, 113
British Socialist Sunday School
Union, 113
Rrotherhood Church, 116
156
GENERAL INDEX
Broussistes, 25
Buford, the “ Soviet Ark,” 58
Building Workers’ Minority Move­
ment, 85
Cabet’s Community, 10
Call, The, organ of B.S.P., 33, 65, 68
Cambridge University War and
Peace Society, 32
Catholic Crusade, foundation of, 127,
128
Catholio Peace Society, 32
Central Executive Committee of the
Russian Soviet Republio. See
TS.I.K.
Central Labour College, 29
Chartist riots, 15
Christian Internationale. See Fel­
lowship of Reconciliation, 106
Christian Orderof Politics, Economics,
and Citizenship (Copeo), 132
Christian Social Union, 127, 128
Christian Socialists, 15, 16, 127
Christian World, The, 131
Church of England Peace League, 32,
108
Church Socialist League, 127, 130
Civil Service and Fabian Society, 18
Clan-na-gael, 72
“ Clart6,” 99 ; joins up with F.C.P.,
103
Class Struggle, The, organ of S.P. of
America, 54
Clyde Workers’ Committee, 62
Clyde Workers’ Propaganda Defence
Committee, 65
Cobden Club and N.C.P.W., 108
Code of Criminal Laws, 70
Committee of International Relations,
132
Commonwealth, The, organ of L.K.G.,
131
Commune, organ of Communist Fed.,
70
Communism, early ideas on, 10 ; aim
of British Socialist bodies, 20;
theory of, 42
Communist, The, organ of S.L., 17 ;
organ of C.P. (Am.), 56, 58 ; organ
of C.P.G.B., 68
Communist Council of Action, 69
Communist Federation, 69
Communist Internationale (see Inter­
nationale, the 3rd)
Communist Labor, organ of O.L.P.
(Am.), 67
Communist Labour Party of America,
44, 67, 58
Communist League of Youth, 116
Communist Party of America, 44, 55,
68, 76
Communist Party of Austria, 52
Communist Party of Belgium, 3rd
Int.., 50
Communist Party of France, founda­
tion of, 49 ; Clart6 joins up with,
104
Communist Party of Great Britain,
66, 67, 71, 87, 95, 101
Communist Party of Holland, 61
Communist Party of Hungary, 45, 52
Communist Party of Ireland, 71
Communist Party of Russia, 44
Communist Party of Switzerland, 62
Communist Propaganda Groups, 27
Communist Rules, 118
Communist Workers’ Party of Hol­
land, 51
Communist World, organ of C.P.
(Am.), 56
Communist Workers’ Party, 71
Communist Youth International. See
Young Communist Int.
Confederation generals du Travail,
27, 74, 82
Confederation generals du Travail
Unitaire, 82
Co-operative Holidays’ Association
and N.C.P.W., 108
Co-operative movement, 15, 91
Co-operative Society, 77, 78
Co-operative Union, 77 ; and
N.C.P.W., 108
Co-Partnership, 91
Council of Aotion, 77, 91
Council for Civil Liberties, 62
Councils of Workmen’s and Soldiers’
Delegates, in England, 62 ; in
Russia, 109
Crusader, The, organ of Soo. of
Socialist Christians, 131
Crusaders of Peace, 107
157
Daily Herald, 62, 66, 97
Democratic Federation, foundation
of, 16, 126
Der Arbeiter Freind, London Yiddish
revolutionary paper, 27, 70
Der Kampf, 56
Distributionists, 9
Drapeau Rouge, organ of Belg. C.P.,
60
Dutch East Indies, revolutionary
organisations in, 61
Eenheit (Unity), 51
Emergency Peace Federation, 37, 110
158 GENERAL INDEX
Fabian Research Department, foun­
dation of, 18 ; changes name to
Lab. Res. Dept., 30, 130
Fabian Society, 93 ; foundation of,
17 ; and Civil Service, 18 ; pro-
g amme of, 18
Fas ists, British, 118, 129
Federation of British Youth Move­
ments, 120, 122 ; and K.K., 123
Federazione Italiano Operai Metal-
lurgichi (F.I.O.M.), 50
Fellowship of Reconciliation, 35, 62,
106, 119, 123, 132; in America,
38, 110
Fellowship of Youth for Peace, 119
Fenians and Karl Marx, 24 ; and
1st International, 24
Ferens, T. R., Vice-Pres. of I.P.S.,
106
Feu, Le, 103
First American Conference for De-
mooraoy and Terms of Peace, 38,
109
Flame, The, 119
Foreign Affaire, organ of U.D.C., 104
Foreign Jews’ Protection Committee,
62
Foreign Languages Federations of
America, 66
Forward, 63
Fourierists in America, 14
France, Utopian Socialists of, 10 ;
Marxian Socialists of, 25. See also
Communist Party of France
France Libre, La, organ of F.S.P., 49
Freedom Group, 27, 70
Freiheit, paper of Johann Most, 27
French Unified Socialist Party, 3rd
Int., 49 ; «= French Communist
Party, 49
Friends’ Council for International
Service, 109
Friends’ Peace Committee and
N.C.P.W., 108
Friends of Soviet Russia (America),
60
Garton Foundation, 32
General Strike. See Strike, General
General Workers’ Minority move­
ment, 85
German Independent Party, 46
German Social Democratic Party, 41,
48, 114
Germany, early Socialism in, 26
Glasgow Anarchist Group, 69
Glasgow Communist Group defeated
Anarchist Group, 27, 68
Glasgow Socialist Sunday Sohools,
113
Group for the Emancipation of
Labour, 25, 40
Guild of Citizens of To-morrow, 122
Guild of St. Matthew, 127
Guild Socialism, 30 ; and L.K.G., 130
Hague Congress for Women, 35, 37
Hands OS Russia Committee, 63, 64
Hearst Press, 111
Herald, The (original name of Daily
Herald),
Herald League, 62
Herald of Peace, The, organ of Peace
Society, 107
Herald of Revolt, 27
Holland, Bolshevism in, 50 ; Social
Democratic Party of, 60 (S.D.P.) ;
Social Democratic Labour Party
of, 50 (S.D.A.P.) ; Communist
Workers’ Party of, 61 (C.A.P.) ;
Union of Fight and Propaganda
Clubs of, 61 (B.K.S.P.)
Humaniti, L', organ of C.P. (Fr.), 49
Hungary, Bolshevism in, 52
Hunger marches, 96
Hyde Park Socialist Club, 71
Icarian communities in America, 14
I.K.K.I. (Executive Committee of
Communist International), 44, 47,
66
I.L.P. Guild of Youth, foundation
of, 118
Independent Labour Party, 33, 34,
62, 95, 132; foundation of, 19; in­
spired by Engels, 19 ; programme
of, 20 ; Left Wing of, 67
Industrial Christian Fellowship, 127,
128, 129, 130
Industrial Syndicalist League, 29
Industrial Workers of the World, 28,
57, 75, 86 ; of America, 75, 110 ;
of Great Britain, 76 ; of Australia,
76
Intercollegiate Socialist Society, 15
Internationale, the 1st, foundation
of, 11 ; end of, 12
Internationale, the 2nd, 43 ; founda­
tion of, 12 ; Conference at Am­
sterdam (1919), 45 ; Conference at
Lucerne (1919), 45 ; Conference at
Geneva (1919), 46 ; headquarters
of, 60 ; Congress in Paris (1900),
114
Internationale, the 3rd, 70, 71 ;
foundation of, 43 ; West European
Secretariat of, 47 ; Third Congress
of, 68 ; and Youth Movement, 115
GENERAL INDEX
Internationale, the 4th, 69
International, organ of W.I.C.P.P., 38
International Arbitration and Peace
Association, 32
International Class War Prisoners’
Aid (I.C.W.P.A.), 99, 102
International Committee of Women
for Permanent Peace, 35
International Communist School
Movement, 116
International Council of Trade and
Industrial Unions, 81
International Federation of Trade
Unions or Amsterdam Inter­
national, 28, 73, 78, 87 ; and May
1, 1921, Manifesto, 79 ; refuses to
affiliate with R.I.L.U., 87
International Fellowship of Recon­
ciliation, 106
International Ladies’ Garment
Workers’ Union of America, 54, 82
International League of Youth for
Peace, 122, 123
International League of Youth, 120
International Peace Brethren, 37
International Peace Scouts, 107
International Peace Society, 106
International Red Aid. See Intern.
Class War Pris. Aid
International Revolutionary Con­
gress (1881), 26
International Socialist Club, 66
International of Socialist Youth,
foundation of, 114
International Suffrage Alliance, 37
International Syndicalist Congress in
America, 28
International Union of Socialist
Workors, 118
International Union of Unemployed,
96
International of Working Class
Youth, the, 118
International of Youth, The, 115
International Youth, 117
International Workingmen’s Associa­
tion in New York, 14
Ireland, Bolshevism in, 71
Irish Communist Brotherhood, 72
Irish Nationalist Movement, 71
Irish Peace Society, 32
Irish Republican Brotherhood, 24,
71, 72
Irish Socialist Republican Party, 24,
71
Irish Transport and General Workers’
Union led by James Larkin, 24,
71
Irish Workers’ League, 71
Irish Workers’ Union, 71
1
1
Iron and Steel Trades Confederation
and N.C.P.W., 108
Italian Federation of Labour, 81
Italian Socialists’ Union, 33
Italy, Socialism in, 25 ; Bolshevism
in, 50
Jacobin Club, 9
Jewish Peace Society, 109
Joint Manifesto of British Socialist
Bodies, 20
Joint Provisional Committee for the
Communist Party of Great Britain,
66
Joint Research Department of the
T.U.C. and Lab. Party, 93
Jugendbewegung, 123
Justice, organ of B.S.P., 33 ; organ
of N.S.P., 33 ; organ of S.D.F., 68,
113; organ of I.L.G.W.U. (Amer.),
82
Kibbo Kil't, 124 ; foundation of, 123
Klassenstryd, De, organ of C.P.
(Hoi.), 51
Komsomol. See Young Communist
League
Kropotkine Anarchists, 27, 70
Labour Colleges, 29
Labour Leader, edited by Keir
Hardie, 19 ; organ of I.L.P., 21
Labour Monthly (Communist), 77
Labour Party, origins of, 21 ; aim
of (1906), 21 ; conference at
Liverpool, 92
Labour Party of Illinois, 14
Labour Party of Norway, 45, 53
Labour Research Department, 95 ;
formerly Fabian Research Dept.,
19, 90, 93
Labour Representation Committee, 21
Labour Socialist International, 89
Labour Union of Bradford, 20
Language Federations, 57
Lauensteiner Kreis, formed by
I.L.Y., 120
League to Abolish War, 109
League of Amnesty of Political
Prisoners in America, 54
League of Communist Youth, 124
League for Industrial Democracy, 15
League of the Kingdom of God, the,
130, 132
League of Nations Union, foundation
of, 108 ; and I.L.Y., 120
League of Peace and Freedom, 35
Leeds Conference, 62
Left Wing, 102
Left Wing Movements, 102
159
160 GENERAL INDEX
Left Wing Section of the Socialist
Party of America, 57
Letchworth Garden City, 131
Liberty, organ of American Anarch­
ists, 26 ; started by Benjamin R.
Tucker, 26
London Labour College, 94
Majority Socialists of Sweden, 52
Marxian Socialism, chap. ii.
Mask, The, 123
Massachusetts Public Interests
League, 119
Masses, 54
Men of the Trees, 125
Mensheviks, 33, 42
Meshrabpom. See Workers’ Inter­
national Relief, 97
Metal Workers’ Minority Movement,
85
Mine Worker, The, organ of National
Minority Movement, 86
Miner, The, edited by Keir Hardie, 21
Miners’ Federation of Great Britain,
30, 79
Miners’Minority Movement (M.M.M.),
85
Miners' Next Step, The, 30
Miners’ Reform Movement, 30, 86
Mines for the Miners’ Movement, 30,
73, 85
M.O.P.R. See International Class
War Pris. Aid
Mot Dag, 63
Mother Earth, official organ of A.A.,
54
Move, the. See Awakening Magyars
National Association of School­
masters and N.C.P.W., 108
National Brotherhood Council and
N.C.P.W., 108
National Building Guild, 30
National Council against Conscrip­
tion, 36
National Council for Civil Liberties,
36
National Council of Labour Colleges,
93, 94
National Council for the Prevention
of War, 107 ; in America, 111
National Council for the Reduction
of Armaments (America), 111
National Free Church Council and
N.C.P.W., 108
National Guilds Council, 30
National Guilds League, 30
National Joint Council of T.U.C. and
L.P., 74, 87
National Labor Union of New York,
14
National League of Women Voters
of America, 111
National Minority Movement
(N.M.M.), 85, 86, 87, 117
National Peace Council. See Na­
tional Council for the Prevention
of War
National Peace Federation, 37
National Reform Union and
N.C.P.W., 108
National Socialist Party, 33, 68
National Union of Railwaymen, 79
National Unemployed Workers’ Com­
mittee Movement, 96
National Workers’Committee Organi­
sation, 66
Navvy Mission, 128
New Gymnosophical Society, 122
New Harmony, 10
New International, The, organ of S.P.
of America, 54
New Leader, organ of I.L.P., 21
New Solidarity, organ of I.W.W., 75
New Standards : a Journal of Workers'
Control, 92
New Student, The, 121
News from Nowhere, 17
Nihilists, 26
Nineteen Seventeen Club, 36
No Conscription Fellowship, 62, 103
No Conscription League (of America),
34, 54
Nomad, The, organ of K.K., 123, 124
No More War, 105
No More War Committee. See
N.M.W.M., 104
No More War Movement, 104, 105,
132 ; Youth Section, 105, 121 ;
and N.C.P.W., 108
Norwegian Left Wing Socialists, 53
Novy Mir, organ, R.S.F., 55, 56
Nudity Movement, 121
One Big Union, idea of A.C.W.U.
and of I.W.W., 75, 82 ; adopted by
Bolsheviks, 86 ; adopted by Brit.
T.U.C., 91
One Big Union Monthly, organ of
I.W.W., 74, 75
Order of the Round Table, T.S.
group, 122
Out of Work organ of N.U.W.C.M., 97
Owenites in America, 14
Pacifism, during War, chap, iv
Pacifism, post-War, chap, xi
Pacifist Youth International. See
I.L.Y.
GENERAL INDEX
Parliamentary Labour Party, 77
Parliamentarianism, 46
Patriot, The, 72, 127, 129 ; and
I.C.F., 129
Peace Conference at Berne, 69
Peace Society, foundation of, 30
People’s Council of America, 54, 109
People’s Freedom Union (Am.), 109,
110
People’s Social Party of Russia, 40
Plebs League, 29, 93, 95
Plebs, organ of “ Plebs League,” 29
Poland, 77
Polit-Bureau, 47
Profintern. See Red Int. of Lab.
Unions
Proletarian Sunday School Move­
ment, 65, 118
Proletcult, 118
Provisional International Council of
Trade and Industrial Unions,
British Bureau of, 84
Public Ownership League, 110
Quakers, 120
Railwayman, patriotism of, in 1921,
79
Rationalist Peace Society, 32
“ Reconciliation, La,” 106
Red Army, 70
Red Catechism, 118
Red Dawn, The, 116
“ Red Flag,” 114
Red Flag, The, 116
Red International of Labour Unions
(“ Profintern ”), 83, 86, 95, 96 ;
British Bureau of, 84 ; of Moscow,
81 j First Congress of, 81
Reds in America, 60, 61, 76, 83
Red Trade Union International of
Moscow, 81 ; campaign against
I.F.T.U., 82
Religion, opposed by S.P.G.B., 23
Revolutionary Age, The, 55
Revolutionary Socialists of Russia,
26, 33, 40
Roode Vaan, organ of Belg. C.P., 50
Rose Street Club in Soho, 16
Rothe Fahne, Die, organ of German
Communists, 48
Ruskin College, 29
Russia, Revolution in, chap, v ;
early Socialism in, 25 ; Anarchism
in, 25, 40 ; Trade Unions in, 80 ;
British Delegation to (1924), 88, 89
Russian-American Industrial Cor­
poration, 110
Russian Anarchists. See Anarchists,
Russian
Russian delegation to England, 1925,
members of, 89
Russian Democratic Party, led by
Plekhanov, 25
Russian Revolution, chap, v
Russian Social Democratic Party, 40
Russian Socialist Federation, 55, 56
Russian Trade Delegation to Eng­
land in 1920, 78 ; financing pro­
paganda in 1920, 78
Scarborough Conference, 91
Scandinavia, Bolshevism in, 62
Scottish Labour Party, 19
Secours Rouge International, 99
Servers’ Group of Young Theoso-
phists, 122
Shakers in America, 13
Social Democrat, The, organ of
S.D.F., 68
Socialdemokrat, organ of L.P. (Nor.),
53
Social Democratic Alliance, 12
Social Democratic Federation, 27,
68, 113 ; foundation of, 16
Social Democratic Labour Party of
Austria, 52
Social Democratic Labour Party of
Holland, 50
Social Democratic Party, 33
Social Democratic Party of America,
14
Social Democratic Party of Austria,
33
Social Democratic Party of Ger­
many, 25
Social Democratic Party of Holland,
50, 114
Social Democratic Party of Switzer­
land, 45, 51
Social Democratic Workingmen’B
Party of North America, 14
Social Democratic Young Workers’
International, 118
Social Party of New York, 14
Socialist, The, organ of, S.L.P., 67
Socialist Labour Party, 33, 67 ;
foundation of, 22
Socialist Labor Party of America,
22, 29, 54
Socialist Labor Party of North
America, 14
Socialist Labour Press, 22
Socialist League, foundation of, 16 ;
Manifesto of, 17 ; collapse of, 17
Socialist Party of America, 46, 54, 56
Socialist Party of France, 33, 44, 46,
48, 49
Socialist Party of Great Britain, 33;
foundation of, 23 ; objects of, 23
161
162 GENERAL INDEX
Socialist Party of Ireland, 24, 71
Socialist Party of Italy, 3rd Int., 45,
50
Socialist Party of Sweden, 53
Socialist Party of Switzerland, 44
Socialist Propaganda League of
America, 54
Socialist Review, organ of I.L.P., 21
Socialist Standard, organ of S.L.P. 23
Socialist Sunday School Movement,
113
Socialist Youth Internationale, 120 ;
Congress of, 119
Society for Cultural Relations Be­
tween the Peoples of the British
Commonwealth and the Union of
Socialist Soviet Republics (S.C.R.),
101
Society of Friends’ Peace Committee,
109
Society for the Promotion of Per­
manent and Universal Peace.
See Peace Society.
Society of Socialist Christians, 131
Socio-Political Labor Unions of
Cincinnati, 14
South German Social Democrats, 37
South Wales Miners’ Federation, 29
South Wales Socialist Society, 66
Soviet Russia, organ of F.S.R. (Am.),
61
Soviet Russia Pictorial, organ of
F.S.R. of America, 61 ; organ of
W .I.R., 98
Soviet of Soldiers’, Workmen’s and
Sailors’ Deputies in Russia, 41, 62
Spartacists, 48
Steinerites, 122
Stormvogels, K.K. in Holland, 124
Strike, General, 46, 77, 78 ; plan of
Syndicalists, 28 ; weapon of Syn­
dicalists, 74; of 1921, 78; of
1926, 135
Strike, railway, of 1919, 76
Sunday Worker, The, 89
Swedish Left Socialist Party, 53
Switzerland, Bolshevism in, 51
Syndicalism, chap, iii ; in America,
28 ; Book “ Syndicalism,” by
Ramsay Macdonald, 28; and
Parliamentarianism, 75 ; and
Communism, 73
Syndicalist, The, 29
Theosophical Society, 122
Torch, The, organ of I.C.F., 128
Tours Congress, 49
Trades Union Congress Parliamentary
Committee, 77
Trade Union Congress, 30, 73, 77, 96 ;
foundation of, 28; in 1895, 28;
personnel in 1925, 88; Scarborough
Conference, 91
Trade Union Educational League of
America, 76, 82
Trade Union Internationale, 80
Trade Union Movement, 15
Trade Union Unity, 90
Trade Union Unity Movement, 89
Transport Workers’ Minority Move­
ment, 85
Transport Workers’Union of Ireland,
71
Tribune, De, organ of C.P. of Hol­
land, 51
Triple Alliance, The, 78 ; Manifesto
of, 79
TS.I.K. - Central Executive Com­
mittee of U.S.S.R., 47, 88, 90
Unemployed Committees, 96
Unemployed Workers’ Organisation,
69
“ Unemployment Sunday,” 96
Unified Socialist Party, French =
French Communist Party
Union of Democratic Control, 34, 37,
62, 103, 104, 132 ; and N.C.P.W.,
108
Union of Russian Workers, 58
United Communist Party of America,
58
United Garment Workers of America,
82
United Irishmen, 24
United Peace Fellowship of the
Churches, 107
Universal Republican Alliance, 16
Utopian Socialism, 10
Vers6hnungsbund, 106, 119
Vorwdrts, 48
War and Peace Societies of Oxford
and Cambridge, 32
War Resisters’ Internationale, 105,
119
West European Secretariat of the
I.K .K .I., 47
Western Federation of Miners in
America, 28
Women’s Committee for World Dis­
armament (in America), 111
Women’s Co-operative Guild, and
N.C.P.W., 108
GENERAL INDEX 163
Women’s International Committee
for Permanent Peace, 37 ; Con­
ference of, at Zurich, 110
Women’s International League, 35,
38, 62 ; and N.C.P.W., 108
Women’s International League for
Peace and Freedom, 104, 110 ; in
America, 111
Women’s Peace Crusade, 35
Women's Peace Party of America, 37
Women’s Suffrage Federation, 66
Women’s Union for Peace, 109
Woodcraft League in Poland, 124
Worker, The, organ of W.P.A., 59 ;
organ of B.B. of R.I.L.U., 85, 89,
97 ; organ of 86
Workers’ Communist Movement, 69
Workers’ Defence Corps, 91
Workers’Defence Union (America), 82
Workers' Dreadnought, 66, 68
Workers’ Educational Association,
94
Workers’ International Industrial
Union (America), 29, 75
Workers' International Pictorial, or­
gan of W.I.R., 98
Workers’ International Relief
(W.I.R.), “ Meshrabpom,” 61, 97,
98 ; Irish Committee of, 99
Workers’ International Russian Re­
lief (W.I.R.R.). See Workers’
International Relief
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Council of
Russia, 64, 63
Workers’ Party of America, 59, 60, 76
Workers’ Peace Council, 36
Workers' Republic, The, organ of
C.P.I., 71
Workers’ Socialist Federation, 66
Workers' Suffrage Federation. See
Workers’ Socialist Federation
Workers' Weekly, The, 100 ; organ of
C.P.G.B., 89
Workingmen’s Association, 11
Workingmen’s Party of the United
States, 14
World Council, 123; world survey,
124
World Federation of Young Theo-
sophists, 122
World of Labour, by G. D. H. Cole, 30
Young Communist International,
115 ; affiliated to 3rd Interna­
tionale, 115 ; publications of, 116 ;
in Berlin, 116
Young Communist League, 115, 116,
119
Young Communist, The, 116, 117
Young Communist Review, 117
Young Comrade, The, 117
Young Comrades’ League, 117
Young Friends’ Movement, 123
Young Pioneers, 116, 117
Young Rebel, The, 117
Young Socialist, The, organ of S.S.S.,
113
Young Socialist International, 118
Young Socialist League, 116
Young Winkle, by John Hargrave,
123
The Young Worker, 117
Young Workers of Austria, 118
Young Workers’ League, 116, 117
Youth, 121, 123 ; organ of I.L.Y., 120
Zimmerwald Congress, 39, 51
Zurich Congress (1893), 13
ENGLAND
not ol Ih r Flabr league or that the C P.G.B Wconnected with
the Ynung Communist League, whilst a double line «h«w*
that the Bullish SoaaHat Party became the C unm iw ot
Party Great Britain
A hne between the vnriotn nrganiftatiun-« <ug-
tiifte* cnnnrction or descent, a double hne thus = - - denotes
transform ation of one secirty Into another nr change of name.
Thm .» *tnglr line shows that the Central Labour Cottage arose
^TH)SAL°5kFO
RM
COMMUNISM
RUSSIA
GERMANY
INTERNATIONAL
IRELAND
AMERICA
ANARCHY
M A R X IA N S O C IA LIS M
K A R L M A R X .
F R I E D R I C E N G E L S ANARCHISM
CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM
CkmUx Aiojrfy
Y O U T H
INDEPENDENT LABOUR
PARTY. S Y N D IC A I IS M
TRAD E UNION
IN T E R N A TIO SA L I S 7E R S A T ION AL
M O V EM EN T
ANARCHO
SYNDICALISM
S Y N D I C A L I S T
CONGRESS
ANARCHIST
COMMUNISM
morAUANM
otnt'M
PACIFISM
RELIGIOUS
1IMMERWALD
CONGRESS
IMA
ONE BIG UNION
G U IIJ) SOCIALISM
C
ath
af now
!«.
P in — III KllrarrnM. NATURE CULT
(HnL IkfADCfa d
W
arRw-lft.'
In
(fn
v«n
xi«i. IV
I»
.|
BURNS CO St
M laia
AMSTERDAM
A fn i. tat*
L U C E R N E
A
m
f . lata
YOUNO
a n a r c h is t
COMMUNISM
.m a m a M * .
»• V
V
M
jg
p
f1U
M
O
l
I Y O U N C ^ V Q RKEItS-
IU
«*w
IN*
| .,t r r X M I 'I M taKWMA
(Worfcm* Iw o m a f sib! K>Vn
IX.P
OK t
E L A N OF
ONE BIG UNION
H
v,w & s
k m
m s s c
^itta.
COM
M
UNIST
PA1TT
AM
ERIC
srai i. ta
L
r«MC
. Fnu
C B. RulW
n
iimc c
•tarry * Hu
0. hiluuca
O
F
A.
i*
M
L
S r .
VtDMT
SO C IA L D EM O C R A TIC
W O RKING M CN-S P A R T Y .
_____________ IH L ________
«TM«I
IN T E R N A T IO N A L E.
ian~i*?a.
____ L i
I . F T •.U .
•A I n * »•
tan
N r ! E*n
0 V»*. iJ ru-rtw
T.LL
•n • .«t «f
CHART ACCOMPANYING "THE SOCIALIST NETWORK" BY NESTA H. WEBSTER.
This chart is arranged latiludinally in chronological order throughout, and longitudinally according to countries
FRANCE
C C N S n T V T lO N A L
W HIGS
R I.V O I.im O N
SO C IE T Y
of N
orw
ich
E N C Y C L O P E D I S T ES. P H IL O S O P H E R S .
rm
+
rnn
trj
