{"type":"link","mylink":"http:\/\/www.iapsop.com\/ssoc\/1935__spivey___the_last_word.pdf","mytitle":"The Last Word","mylang":"de"}
THE LAST WORD
By
THOMAS SAWYER SPIVEY
Published by The Author
Pool Hill Farm
Shawneetown, Illinois
OTHER PUBLICATIONS BY THE AUTHOR
The Last of the Gnostic Masters
- By -
THOMAS SAWYER SPIVEY
A Thrilling Novel—A Challenge to Christianity
Price $2.50
Lavius Egyptus (2 vol.)
Jane and I
Dr. Paul McKim
The Hoosier Widow
The Seven Sons of Ballyhack
The Caverns of Crail
The End of Human Endeavor
Is This a Dying World?
Speculative Anthropology
The Light of the Nation
The Revelation (660 pages), Price
Dealing with the Translation of the Bible
The Resurrection (illustrated), Price
Gnostic Origin of Christianity
Visible Evolution (520 illustrations), Price
Christianity and Mythology (illustrated), Price.
Ecclesiastical Vocabulary and Code, Price
$4.00
. 2.50
. .50
1.50
. 1.50
All Prices Postpaid
Published and Distributed by Thomas Sawyer Spivey
Pool Hill Farm, Shawneetown, Illinois
Copyrighted 1935
AM
The Bible
Must Be Suppressed
Because of Its Immoral Influences.
The Church
Must Be Eliminated
As the Greatest Burden of Mankind.
Science and Reason
Must Be Reinstated
As Essential to National Integrity.
Honest Government,
By
Honest Men,
Must Be Restored
Or Crime and Insanity Will Rule,
And This Nation Must Perish.
- By -
THOMAS SAWYER SPIVEY
Pool Hill Farm,
Shawneetown, Illinois
1935
FOREWORD
This publication requires no preface, explanation or
apology.
The evidences set forth in these pages are amply suffi
cient to meet all criticism by prejudiced minds, and the
righteous indignation of those who live, thrive and fatten
upon the evils we expose, and inspired credulity.
Crime, poverty and insanity are settled down upon this
nation like a cloud of locusts, as the curse of cultivated ig
norance, inspired fear and endless inquisitional laws.
Those directly responsible for the degradation and shame
of this nation, pose as Gods on earth, Lords and masters of
common mankind, while they, and their sycophant followers,
sit in luxury and ease, or strut in pomp and splendor.
The end of this great usurpation is near and inevitable.
Starving humanity, impoverished in mind and body, is
awakening to the truth, the blasphemous churches must be
eradicated, that their treacherous influences upon civil gov
ernment may be wholly suppressed.
. —The Author.
THE CHURCH
Never before in our national history has the church so
openly and defiantly posed as being superior to our civil
government. Its secret organizations have undermined the
foundation of this nation of people as none other.
Never before has a people been so misled and betrayed,
as have the people of the United States. The nation is now
a patch-quilt, composed of fragments from the peoples of
all nations, with no civilizing purpose in common.
Mean advantage has been taken of the mixture and con
fusion of nations, languages and customs of the conglom
erate mass of which the nation is now composed, enabling
the church to practically seize control of this government
through collusion with evil political powers and our uncen-
sored voting franchise.
If the church produces nothing, pays no taxes and lives
off charity, why should its followers be permitted to prac
tically stand as a balance of power in the voting booth?
A new form of ignorance is being cautiously cast over
the people, to attract the attention of the people away from
the encroachment of both church and state upon the true in
dividual rights and privileges "guaranteed" by our constitu
tion.
The loud blare and trumpetry of so-called athletics and
hysterical games, trivial in character, is placing the younger
generation in physical condition for the next war.
Many church structures are well-armed fortresses.
The country is dotted with newly constructed army bar
racks and thousands of young men are there being trained
for some emergency.
The universities and colleges of the nation are now
quarreling over the question of military training of students.
Young men opposed to such an abnormal conception of edu
cation are promptly suppressed.
The colleges are one with the usurpative church and
they are boldly moulding political parties to their ends and
s
6 The Last Word
purposes. Every motion of these secretly united powers is
a brazen false-pretense, carrying or concealing some ulterior
purpose to further humiliate the gaping, unthinking, slaving
masses, who have little or no voice in the conduct of our
government.
The people are already smothered beneath a blanket of
irritating laws, so numerous not even the government can
name their limit, while federal, state and municipal mills
continue to grind them out by thousands.
It may not be disputed, each new law creates a new
class of criminals, making endless offices for political job-
hunters, and yields unknown sums in licenses, fines, penal
ties and taxes.
These laws tease and torment the people, generating
hatred for all law instead of respect. The evil results are
so palpable they may not be concealed —the constitution is
wholly abandoned —the federal government is smothering .
state rights, as the inspired state legislators smother the people.
Taxation, in every conceivable form, has so impoverished
the people, business stability is beyond recovery. A legalized
system of graft, in the name of taxation, is throttling the
nation, to support endless thousands of political strap-hangers.
Crime is openly commercialized for the tremendous profit
it yields.
Poverty is commercialized and made a source of revenue
for thousands of so-called charity rackets, by permissible,
coercive-suasion and fear, taking from the people unknown
millions in addition to abnormal taxes. These forces hide
behind the skirts of the church and are not challenged or in
vestigated by the law. The church is immune against legal
intrusion.
The churches openly demand they be supported by the
nation, even to the point of attempting to inspire laws for
the support of their schools.
Chicago and New York are examples of church-ridden
cities and they are classed among the most criminal cities in
the world.
The Last Word 7
The awful cost of maintaining this senseless burden is
independent of ordinary taxation, with not one item of evi
dence to prove benefit, moral or physical. The taxless
churches have impoverished this nation.
The increase in crime and poverty is not disputed. Why
carry this senseless church burden if it accomplishes nothing
beneficial to the people?
Even crime is utilized for political purposes during po
litical campaigns. It fell under our observation that during
the campaign of 1934 more than three hundred prisoners
were released from the prisons in southern Illinois to go
home and vote by the side of decent, self-respecting men.
This is identical with the contemptible, brutish propo
sition that every man, woman and child in the United States
be branded as potential criminals, along with real criminals
by universal finger-printing.
The whole purpose of the Catholic scheme is to over
awe the masses with the pomp and splendor of its usurpa-
tive power, and to compel the government to acknowledge
and proclaim the church superiority.
The Vatican at Rome maintains twenty-three Jesuit col
leges for the training of special priests for secret work in
all the countries.
Up to 1917 there had been 260 "gods on earth," called
popes —each pope is named "god on earth." This proves
conclusively that men are posing as gods, and that gods must
die.
Necessarily they must all go to their own hell, for in
their own secret code, hell means the grave.
Our indifferent voting franchise is handing over to the
Catholic church the controlling voting power of this nation
and this means civil control of the people. This is made
possible by connivance with evil political influences, easily
purchased by bloc voting.
We shall reveal, beyond all possibility of refutation, that
the church is founded upon evil and lives upon commer
cialized poverty. It has deliberately destroyed the natural
8 The Last Word
trend and purposes of civilization for mean selfish ends, and
has appropriated to itself practically all the wisdom, science
and benefits of the world's meritorious institutions.
It should bring a blush of shame to the face of every
decent, self-respecting citizen that the association of the
church and political bodies are brazenly open, regardless of
the respect due our constitution.
Pious false-hood and fraud, for the promotion of the
church, are not regarded as sinful. This was secretly taught
by the so-called "church-fathers," the founders of church
law, and promoters of church mysteries, which are concealed
even from the congregation.
The popes of Rome, through the centuries, have posed
as gods upon earth, to cover cowardly kings and awe the ig
norant masses, hence their constant secret connivance with
dishonest political powers to seize and maintain control of
governments.
The political power and secret influence of the church
is always concealed behind the most influential party, as its
connivance in wars was always covered by its association with
the stronger side when nations were at war.
It is our purpose to reveal the truth that so-called chris
tianity is a gross false-pretense, to conceal an undercover
organization, which, from its origin, sought to confiscate from
all other forms of religion and education their essential
merits by plagiarization, to claim them as being of its alleged
universal origin.
This is truly a revelation which must, of necessity, re
move all pretense of religion from this organization which
has made of human governments on this earth a farce, and
a false-pretense, to cover and conceal commercialized evil.
The evil elements must be rudely suppressed, and man
kind must be enlightened regarding the promotion of a true
and national civilization, based upon natural philosophy and
reason. Human gods and strutting lords must be eliminated.
The glorification of human christs by elevation to high office,
must cease; class distinction must be wholly destroyed from
The Last Word 9
our educational system. Equal opportunity must be made a
basic law to rule the promotion of the people.
Equal participation in education and enlightenment, alone,
may lift humanity out of the degradation into which it has
been cast by cruel, heartless, senseless brutes, not yet raised
to the level of logic and reason, but who live only to pro
mote a false and frivolous self-glorification.
The classing of the greater producing masses as cattle
and sheep, and capital of the non-producers, must be given
the iron-fist, with no uncertain purpose.
Vanity, conceit and big-I-amism, must be slapped out
of the faces of those who are placed in public office, as pub
lic servants of the people, to honestly administer the affairs
of the nation.
Favoritism must be wholly suppressed.
THE SUPPRESSION OF TRADITIONAL GNOSTI
CISM AND THE CONFISCATION OF ITS
WISDOM BY ECCLESIASTICISM
And now, we shall prove, beyond all doubt, that so-called
christianity did suppress and confiscate gnosticism and con
ceal its wisdom in code, symbolism, imitation, and personi
fication, and wilfully leads mankind away from the natural
truth, in its attitude toward evolution, because natural evo
lution betrays it.
In its every motion, creative nature records a progressive
evolution in its visible works.
Evolution is the basic purpose of revealed physical nature.
True gnosticism is based upon the traditional enlighten
ment, education, knowledge, science and wisdom, brought
down through the generations, hence the name gnosis means
to know.
That knowledge was always true to nature.
In its every motion creative nature records a progres
10 The Last Word
sive evolution in its visible works. Evolution is the basic
revelation of physical processes.
The progressive steps in a well-defined physical and
mental evolution of living creatures upon this earth are re
corded in a consecutive set of waves which may well be
named the primary creative waves.
The gnostics adopted the serpent, in its four motive at
titudes, as the only living creature which can record, in a
single series of motion waves, the four basic creative mo
tions of nature.
These creative waves are active and reactive, positive
and negative, and they reveal themselves in a single creative
act, and manifest in living material and physical bodies, by
visible waves or equivalent masses or consistency.
No living, physical being can come into existence with
out following this set of waves, and manifesting them in
consecutive order, in their visible aspect.
Ecclesiasticism wholly suppressed this truly wonderful
gnostic wisdom, and has antagonized the theory of evolution
which reveals it.
GNOSTIC CREATIVE PROCESSES OF NATURE,
CREATIVE WAVES
Positive Waves Molecule Negative Waves
Electron Nitrogen Oxygen Carbon Hydrogen Carbon Oxygen Nitrogen Atom
All material, physical nature is a reflection of this sys
tem. These waves reflect the signature of creative nature.
They represent every motion that can be made in the crea
tion and revelation of visible material things. They manifest
in waves, masses and consistency.
The positive motion forms a path from the universal
pabulum to the molecular spiral, which is the primary living
The Last Word 11
molecule, the first embodiment of life, resulting from the
exhaustion of the first positive motion.
The negative waves are backed out of the spiral to form
material, physical and organic bodies, giving visibility to the
creative process, revealing the potential, never-dying, life-
spark in every form and attitude.
Each wave manifests its own natural and specific func
tions.
The creative process is always a forward motion. The
creative waves cannot regurgitate back through each other.
The Positive Waves
Electron. Nitrogen. Oxygen. Carbon. Hydrogen.
Potentiality. Vibratory. Gasseous. Solid. Fluid.
Stability. Cold. Warm. Dry. Moist.
These are the natural primary creative states and attitudes.
In this consecutive procession, evolution leaves its in-
dellible foot-prints.
It is at once recognized that this is the spiritual attitude
of four primary forces, which culminate in the revelation of
these same forces in material forms, hence, we may know
that this revelation is a premeditated act, therefore it must
have a primary mentation back of it.
This is the universal mentation. It is not an individ
uality, but is a permanent and unchanging source of creative
forces, which, when released, may not directly return to their
original source, as demonstrated by non-regurgitation, in one
universal act.
The primary basic elements are four, as we have illus
trated as the positive waves, terminating in the spiral, as the
first spark of life clothed in a material body, the molecule,
hence the first grain of matter is born with this act.
We quickly recognize this as the birth of the male and
female principles in one body and from this body will spring
all subsequent creations.
12 The Last Word
It is in the separation of these two principles that we
find the birth of the negative set of waves.
Hydrogen. Carbon. Oxygen. Nitrogen. Atom.
Water. Earth. Life. Atmosphere. Animals.
It is at once seen that each of these elements receives as its
nourishment the excrement of the preceding body and we
shall later find this to be an amazing truth.
The original electron was the primary unit of universal
substance residing in absolute vacuum. It represents univer
sal potentiality.
Potential in the electron are the four basic creative forces,
nitrogen, oxygen, carbon and hydrogen, having attractive and
repulsive instincts.
This is one original force, one energy, passing through .
four attitudes to create the first atom of embodied conscious
ness, the first material molecule of matter.
Carbon represents exhaustion and becomes the material
body of the hydrogen spiral, the first embodiment of life.
The living spark never dies.
The first great act of universal creation is to send forth
the vast spiral body, the sun.
This represents the casting off of the body which be
comes the earth and its waters. We at once recognize the
hydrogen spiral in water, and the carbon in the earth, the
oxygen in the atmosphere and the nitrogen in our moon cast
off the side of this planet.
This brings us down to earth for our future studies.
Life is no longer a universal mystery.
Between the axial motion of our planet and its orbital
motion about the sun, we have a full revelation of the whole
universal scheme.
Symbolism becomes the language of this process.
The Sun, axial motion The Moon, orbital motion
The Last Word 13
This now becomes a creative trinity for the development
of physical material beings upon this earth. The sun and
the moon are agents of planetary and universal contact.
The spiral and the ring are opposing elements, hence
our mechanical atmosphere.
No creative act or process can be executed without fol
lowing the system of primary creative waves. Nature has
provided against regurgitation of life through these waves.
Therefore we may expect to find this system revealed in the
created living things upon this earth—a substantial evolution.
It is a self-evident truth that we absorb our life from
the atmosphere which surrounds the earth. Axial motion dis
tributes this atmospheric life, which is oxygen, and planetary.
Orbital motion gathers into this atmosphere the nitro
gen, which constitutes four-fifths of our atmosphere and is
of a universal character.
We receive our oxygen from the sun principle and our
nitrogen from the moon principle, in this planetary system.
Nitrogen is not life, but is essential in mentation in liv
ing bodies.
The process is extremely simple. This earth receives
in its atmosphere oxygen from the sun directly, and from the
moon indirectly it receives nitrogen.
Thus, the sun, a burning vortex, drawing its sustenance
from the universal pabulum, sends oxygen into our atmos
phere, which cannot directly unite with the earth, because
of carbon and hydrogen having concealed their points of
contact in forming the original spiral.
Earth
Receptive
Sun Radiative
Moon
Reflective
14 The Last Word
Oxygen coils into a spiral, retaining its potential atom
of hydrogen, making it the equivalent of ammonia—OH = 17
which later forms contact with the earthy hydrogen to form
water—H'O = 18, hence the vast bodies of water associated
with the land.
The moon is a cold, inactive body, therefore naturally
reflective. It reflects the nitrogen wave into the earth's at
mosphere, and, like the oxygen, it can form no direct con
tact with the earth, hence it coils into the orbital ring as a
potential atmospheric element to be later absorbed by the
living products of the earth.
It is only by reaction, therefore, that this earth receives
the potential universal contact.
These two elements forming our mechanical atmosphere
inspire both the axial and the orbital motion of this planet.
It is the nitrogen ring by which we form a direct contact
with the universal mentation. Nitrogen is always an agent
of mentation. It is especially absorbed by our senses of see
ing and hearing, as shown in our illustration of man as a
reproduction of the universal scheme. It is by respiration
we receive the same elements into our physical system, prov
ing conclusively, that these atmospheric elements sustain life
in physical bodies, for when we cease breathing our physical
body dies.
The earth is merely suspended in a state of mechanical
balance in its atmosphere as is proven by the atmosphere
being identical on land and sea.
Vegetation precedes animal life upon this planet as a
sustaining food for the physical, organic development, there
fore, vegetation, although living matter, is an excrement of the
planet, and an essential link in evolution.
The excrements of every living system are of two kinds,
one a living, reproductive_f ruit and the other a lifeless eliminant,
having surrendered its life in the evolution of living bodies.
The living excrement of every system becomes the sus
taining nourishment of subsequent living creations, whereas,
the dead excrements pass back to the earth to be renewed
The Last Word 17
An examination of the "Tree of Good and Evil" re
veals its negative nature.
The heads of the serpents representing the limbs are
all pointed toward and are attached to the body or trunk
of the tree, which symbolizes the land, showing that the
limbs receive their material nourishment from the earth di
rect, and this means carbon and hydrogen.
The leaves of the tree, symbolizing the respiratory at
mosphere, inhale nitrogen and oxygen from the atmosphere,
and receive carbon and hydrogen from the circulation of the
tree from the limbs.
The fruit of the tree is attached directly to the limbs.
It is a self-evident fact that nitrogen is not directly in
volved in the production of this fruit.
We are now going to reveal a marvelous thing in nature,
and at the same time, we shall vindicate Lavoisier and con
vict Ecclesiasticism of premeditated, cold-blooded murder.
The leaves of the tree surrender the oxygen they absorb from
the atmosphere to the limbs, which represent the oxygen wave.
The law forbidding regurgitation prevents the absorption
of the nitrogen.
It is a scientific truth that nitrogen is the most potent
decomposer of dead matter, and wherever possible it sepa
rates life and matter.
The leaves yield up oxygen, life, then die and fall to
the earth to be devoured by nitrogen.
Therefore, Lavoisier was right when he named nitrogen
Azote, meaning "no life." Nitrogen is the element which
the church chose as its god.
This awful revelation had to be suppressed or the church
would be disgraced for teaching the worship of a lifeless
god, therefore they promptly cut off the. head of Lavoisier.
There is a final revelation which further vindicates this
gnostic wisdom. The fruit of this tree, the apple, symbolizing
the respiratory animals, in its essential acid, named malic
acid, O Hi O, contains no nitrogen. This is also true of
pears and many other fruits.
18 The Last Word
We at once realize that the respiratory animal life is
the next step in a well-defined natural evolution of embodied
life upon this planet, with man as the most advanced crea
ture of the organic and physical progression.
Only superior mentation marks the man as superior to
the lower animal kinds.
Physically, man is inferior to many of the lower animal
kinds. Therefore, to declare him as a special dispensation
in nature, as a whole, is pure bunk, to eliminate natural
evolution of physical life upon this planet.
Evolution is the basic principle in the promotion of uni
versal, planetary and earthy systems.
In the same verse mentioning the birth of Enos—mortal
man —it is said that this was the beginning of men to call
upon the name of the Lord. Analyzed by the secret ecclesi
astic code, this becomes of vital interest.
En means to make.
Os means many openings to god.
Hence, mouths of the people calling upon the Lord, mean
ing the Loafwarden, bread giver.
The god is to be acknowledged as the source of all
nourishment by the prayers of the hungry.
The same thing applies also to the name Abel.
Ab means the high-priest.
El means the first-cause. Abel means the breath.
Therefore god and the priesthood reside in the atmos
phere. We at once recognize the first cause as Nitrogen,
God and the priest as oxygen, the Christ, hence the people
cannot come in direct contact with God.
Thus this usurpative thing, called the church, assumes
to be in control of even the breath we breathe.
The Seth man is the special dispensation, therefore it
was essential for God to form a man out of the dust of the
ground to raise up the common, producing mankind.
"The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and man be
came a living soul." (Gen. 2:7.)
The Last Word 19
"The soul is the life of man" (Ps. 33:19).
Therefore, the soul in man is a transient thing.
It is a self-evident fact that the breath we breathe is
our life, because when we cease breathing we die. Moreover,
no external power is responsible for inhalation. Our organic
breathing is an internal process. Therefore the pushing of the
air into human nostrils by an external being was a crude joke.
We should dwell upon this creative period because it is
the constructive period of the church and its usurpative forces.
Naturally, man, who supports the church, had to be created
and organized before the church could be introduced. This,
doubtless, is the Seth man, evoluting out of the earthy trend.
God does not manifest on earth in physical form, but
sends his Adamic man as his representative, and as the Ec-
clesiasts try in vain to create a special dispensation to pose
as a master-man, and the priesthood, Nature emphatically
repudiates this blasphemous intrusion by usurpative elements,
by making it clear that all men born under normal conditions,
are born equal, and are led into good or evil ways afterwards,
by good or evil influences.
The Biblical theme attempts to create a nitrogen and
oxygen man and a carbon man associated with hydrogen,
woman—the church.
This creation of man is a revelation. The first man
was created by God, "in his own image."
This was the Earth and the Sea.
This was the productive man.
Earth means the producer.
Life begins in the waters.
The second man was formed from the dust of the ground.
This was the earthy products of low estate, the vege
tation, as evidenced by the word Lord, meaning Loafwarden,
the distributor of food.
The third man was begotten by Seth.
This was Enos, meaning mortal man, evoluted out of
the lower animals and subject to temptation and fall.
20 The Last Word
En means many. Os means openings, mouths, to call
upon the Lord, Loafwarden, for food.
God supplies the spiritual nourishment, indirectly, and
the Lord God supplies the material nourishment directly.
The analysis of the physical man reveals the truth be
yond dispute. He is the living image and likeness of the
universal creative system.
MAN THE TRUE REVELATION
The Image and Likeness of the Planetary System
THE ORGANIC MAN
The head is the censor—everything passing into the body is first passed
to the head.
The heart is the distributor of life.
The stomach is the selector and digester of material foods.
The pelvic organs are the eliminators.
The Last Word 21
This revelation reveals the impossibility of an individual
God, such as is described by the church, hence the Pope of
Rome, posing as God on Earth, is a base impostor, for an
analysis proves him to be a normal human being, attempt
ing to usurp powers which belong to all men alike.
The church theme is:
The nitrogen man is God—the pope.
The oxygen man is Christ —the priesthood.
The carbon man is Jesus
—the producer.
The hydrogen woman is the church.
The electron is the invisible source of all power, hence
we find the pope concealed in the vatican.
Their own secret code exposes this false-pretense. Chris
tianity is concealed sun-worship, the sun being worshipped as
the Lord God.
"For the Lord God is a sun and shield" (Ps. 84:11).
Christ is from Chur, meaning guardian of the sun.
Jesus is Je, ever-existant. Sus means sustainer, sup
porter.
The church is always female, Mer, Mary, the sea.
Church, also is Chur, guardian of the sun.
Jesus is Joshua, brought over into the new testament,
this being the Greek form.
Joshua is Jo, meaning increased, and Shua meaning
wealth, the savior of the Jews. This increased wealth was
made possible by giving to the Jews, Canaan, meaning mer
chandising and trading.
To this day the Jews are wholly occupied in the same
calling.
Jesus symbolizes the body of producing mankind, labor
ing to support the church, and maintain the priesthood in
ease and luxury.
It is this body of greater humanity that is sacrificed,
therefore Christ and Jesus cannot be one and the same.
Christ means authority.
Later we shall reveal that Jesus is the outer, physical
man and Christ is the inner, organic man.
22 The Last Word
Now, you poor simps, who coddle and pet your fat-
jowled, pig-bellied priests, do you realize that your promised
heavenly home merely means that you will be made a per
manent member of the church militant mob, to continue to
labor for the support of the priesthood?
Now, examine our illustration of the physical man, repre
senting a reflection of the universal, creative scheme and
ask your priest if this is not the "image" mentioned in Gene
sis. Then ask him to point out one single evidence which
will prove his superiority over you, and all other men, that
is not given him by the sweat and labor of those who pro
duce —this is truly the sacrifice of the muscular Jesus, hang
ing upon the bony cross from "calvary," the base of the
skull. This is the meaning of calvary in their own secret code.
What a pitiful thing is the ignorant man, who looks up
to his priest as a superior being. They both must die and
both must go to hell, for hell in their secret code means the
grave.
THE REVELATION
We shall now go deeper into the mysteries of Nature
to reveal man as the true revelation—every man. All men
are born equal.
No greater curse ever fell upon this earth than the in
troduction of the fabulous false-pretense, named the Chris
tian religion, because it deliberately and wilfully swindled
the greater humanity out of its natural inheritance and classi
fied it as cattle, meaning capital.
In the Bible this is revealed in the story of Jacob and
Esau —the church and producing mankind.
Jacob means usurpation by deceit and falsehood.
Esau means earthy—producing mankind.
Esau, the earthy producer, inherits the sunlight and the
atmospheric conditions which cause the earth to produce food
for man and beast.
Jacob, by lies, steals from Esau his inheritance. Jacob's
The Last Word 23
mother, who aids him in this crime, is named Rebekah, mean
ing snare, trickery.
This has especial reference to the stealing of the Gnostic
wisdom from the people by the Ecclesiastic priesthood. It
required five hundred years for the church to suppress Gnos
ticism.
THE PLANETARY SYSTEM— POSITIVE
Each element in the universal creative system has its
specific functions, and is a symbol of a principle in a positive
process, seeking to reveal itself in a preconceived and per
fected creation—the true revelation. To attempt to defeat
the object of a single essential element means to stunt or
defeat the whole process.
This illustration will especially deal with our planetary
system.
Our moon
Q reflects from its surface nitrogen rings
i^^^^^V/'O which it cannot absorb, and this form
of nitrogen constitutes four-fifths of the atmosphere of the
earth.
This element in our atmosphere is the interplanetary
mental contact and the source or exchange of planetary wis
dom essential to understanding, therefore the element nitro
gen, also unites our atmosphere with universal contact.
There are twenty moons directly involved in our plane
tary exchange system and this may well be named our inter
planetary television and telephonic system.
These moons receive and reflect from and to each other,
the forces which give intelligence to the planets, in propor
tion to their advancement in the creative processes and their
positions in relation to each other and the whole system.
This intelligent wisdom is reflected into the planetary
atmospheres, hence we may know, by the creative waves, the
state or condition of planets by the number of moons each has.
Mercury—no moon.
24 The Last Word
Venus —a partially developed moon, later to be cast off
her side.
Earth—one moon.
Mars—two moons.
Jupiter—five moons.
Saturn —eight moons.
Uranus —four moons.
Therefore, twenty moons constitute this interplanetary
telegraphic exchange.
This will reveal a marvelous similitude in our perfected
man.
This system may be recognized in the human body as
the brain and the spinal nervous system, as the receiver of
this universal intelligence, and the sympathetic nervous sys
tem as the distributor —a dual process.
Nitrogen, therefore, is the creative principle involved and
always guarding against being permanently confined in matter.
planet, but eliminates the carbon and coils into the atmos
pheric spiral, which may well be named the seed of the sun,
giving light and life to this planet.
This, in the human image, is symbolized by the heart
and dual circulation of the blood, which carries the life prin
ciple into the lymphatic system for distribution to the whole
body.
Lymph means zvater, therefore we may understand why
living matter upon this planet begins in the waters.
This especially has reference to the organic system which
is the normal course of the spirit.
Respiration is the mechanical source of the supporting
elements, with the lungs associated with the heart.
The third essential organic center is the abdomen, with
its digestive organs, symbolizing carbon and hydrogen—a dual
The sun radiates heat and light only to the planets
of its own system, in the form of oxygen,
which cannot directly form a contact with the
The Last Word 25
receptive body. A reflection of the dual earth and
* sea, dependent upon the sun for its physical support,
and upon the moon for mental support.
This dual male and female body reproduces in material,
physical, organic bodies, our living systems which becomes
the true revelation of the universal creative scheme —embodied
vegetable and animal life.
The true revelation is perfected man, male and female.
The dual male and female principles are inseparable in
living creative nature.
Simultaneously the land and the sea bring forth their
living products— vegetation on the land and living animal
life in the sea to come forth and people the land.
The visible living animals upon the land creep out of
the waters and attempt to rise into the atmosphere, intimating
a desire for universal contact. Each element has a distinctive
mark for its own. Sea scales. Earth hair. Air feathers.
The greater physical and mental evolution is manifested
in the animal life upon the land.
All nature feeds upon and is nourished by the excre
ments and fruits of the preceding system which produces
it,
as the mother suckles her young.
Animal life feeds upon vegetation.
The earth preceded vegetation, hence
it
brings forth
nourishment and reproduces the tree.
The dual nature of the earth produces
a
reciprocity
which
is
truly
a
material respiration: the tree returning to
the earth, its leaves to fertilize the soil, and its living fruits,
containing the seeds of reproduction, to promote the evo
lution.
The following example will reveal the promotion of ani
mal evolution in no uncertain manner.
Man
is
the highest type of animal production.
The Biblical story in Genesis, which tells of the "tree
of life, the "tree of good and evil" and the temptation and
fall of Adam and Eve,
is
made to look like
a
bed-time story,
under the light of Gnostic philosophy.
It
is
all such
a
pal
26 The Last Word
pable confiscation, it necessarily puts the stamps of false-
pretense and plagiarization upon the whole Bible.
Let us study the Gnostic revelation and see to what ex
tent the church has wilfully plagiarized from this natural and
logical system, covering the traditional enlightenment by na
ture of centuries before the Ecclesiastic usurpation was
dreamed of.
The Gnostic system does not attempt to conceal wisdom
as a mystery, as does the church. Full revelation is its sole
intent and purpose. On the contrary, it is absolutely essen
tial for the church to smother in ignorance the greater
masses of people, else it would be exposed as a contemptible
upstart, and imitator, with only evil purposes.
The church condemns itself by concealing its true charac
ter in a secret code, which attempts to personify Nature, and
the natural traditional Gnostic science and philosophy, that
it may commercialize all education.
The Gnostic man rises up like a ghost and points his
accusing finger at the usurpative church.
As we previously said, there are twenty active moons
censoring the mentation of this planetary system, this planet
having a single moon, hence we find each vital organ with
a protecting moon attached to it—the fore brain, the lungs,
the liver and the kidneys. In this system the planet Mars
is reflected by the kidneys and curious to observe, the kidneys
come nearest to being separated as two moons. Mars has
two moons.
But, as we previously promised, the truly great manifes
tation of universal contact by virtue of the moon principle,
is found in the arms, hands, legs and feet of man.
These are the go-getters for our body.
The legs and feet carry us to our food, and our hands
reach forth and grasp it and carry it to the head to be cen
sored before it is assimilated into our being.
There are attached to the fingers and toes twenty well-
defined crescent moons, and like unto the moons of the
planets, although they are a part of the bones which repre
The Last Word 27
sent the earth, yet they are not materially attached to the
bones.
This is clearly a material and physical symbolism of the
functions of the moons in this planetary system.
These moons cannot absorb the universal waves, there
fore they reflect them to their planetary atmospheres and
to each other, thus creating an inter-planetary mentation and
agreement and forming a universal contact.
The seemingly most trivial aspects of the organs and
their parts, must not be treated lightly, for each has its own
revealing powers.
The external facial sense organs especially emphasize this.
The eye is globular, ^ revealing an electronic or
direct universal contact by vision.
This reveals the eye as the absorber of the original source
of all the subsequent waves entering into our own intricate
organization, there to be digested and distributed to the ner
vous system.
The electron is the primary unit out of which all the
creative waves are projected, therefore the eye supplies the
brain with undigested electrons to give birth to the waves of
mentation, proving the brain to be the seat of mentation and
thought.
The first form assumed by these absorbed electrons is
globular. Out of these are reflected the waves which create
the pictures of vision, therefore the eye is but a photographic
instrument to absorb the materials to be later developed into
mental reflections to be interpreted by thought and reason,
and revealed as material facts in our own material bodies.
This gives us positive evidence that the material pictures
of physical things about us are the real living parts of the
universal body, appealing to us through all of our sense or
gans for recognition.. Physically they are no part of us, un
til we have absorbed and digested their fruits as mental
nourishment.
The human ear, even in a more specific manner, reflects
an absolute mental contact with the universal creative thought.
28 The Last Word
Following the electron or rather, cast out of the electron,
is the first creative motion, the wave of nitrogen. This vi
bratory wave carries potentially within
it,
for future revela
tion, the gaseous wave of oxygen, x-^^^^^^j the straight
or exhausted wave of carbon — and the spiral
of hydrogen.
@
This spiral
is
the first molecule of living
matter.
We have
a
remarkable revelation in the sense of hearing.
As the eye converts electronic elements into visible, un
derstandable pictures, the ear converts the vibratory waves
into understandable sounds, out of which mentation coins
words.
Each of these senses leaves
a
signature which may not
be misunderstood.
The globular electron reveals that
it
is
an absorbed ele
ment, whereas the nitrogen wave of sound
is
a
projected ele
ment which must unfold until the force involved in the pro
jective power
is
exhausted and its revealed, material result
must be at the end of the wave series, because these creative
waves cannot regurgitate back through each other. This
is
the positive set of waves, terminating in the spiral, symbol
izing the waters or sea.
What do we find associated with the ear, the organ of
the sense of hearing?
First the outer ear, resembling the cup-like shells of cer
tain products of the sea —oyster, clam.
Second, within the ear structure
is
the spiral cochlea,
resembling the spiral shells of sea-life.
While light, in
a
high degree, does interpret sound,
it
is
not always essential to understanding.
The organ of the sense of smell
is
more essential as the
agent of respiration, having two openings, revealing the
'
of smell to be dependent upon the gaseous atmosphere, nitro
gen and oxygen, as the carriers.
The sense of smell, as also the sense of taste, with the
mouth as the facial organ,
is
mechanical.
All these senses and their organs are the censors of the
The Last Word 29
elements which nourish the organic man, who by mechanical
processes, constructs the outer physical human body, making
of this gross body the servant and go-getter for the thinking
being, everything contributing to the nourishing and mainte
nance of the body, being first censored by the head, then
passed to well defined centers for proper assimilation.
The brain is the seat of mentation, with the spinal nerves,
and the sympathetic nerves as distributing agents.
The heart is the seat of physical life with its circulatory
system as its distributing agent. The stomach is the seat of
digestion and preparation of nourishing and constructive ele
ments for the physical body, with the lymphatics as its dis
tributing agent.
The pelvic organs are agents of elimination.
And we vision all coming out of the unlimited universal
pabulum with the electron as the living unit of the universe.
We may well be shocked to realize that the four essen
tial departments of our body also are images of our plane
tary system, with the inner, or oganic man even carrying this
resemblance to the universal system.
Later we shall show that the so-called Christian system
attempted to confiscate this natural Gnostic revelation.
The Bible is prolific in Gnostic plagiarisms in a vulgar
attempt to imitate Nature.
THE CREATIVE RESEMBLANCE
Electron Nitrogen
Vibratory
Head
Brain
Nerves
Flesh
Moon
Oxygen
Gaseous
Thorax
Heart
Blood
Muscle
Sun
Carbon
Solid
Abdomen
Stomach
Matter
Bone
Earth
This cannot possibly be a mere coincidence,
in nature adjusts itself to this formula.
Hydrogen
Fluid
Pelvis
Bladder
Lymph
Marrow
Sea
Every system
30 The Last Word
The act of walking is a revelation.
The following is probably the origin of the cadeuceus
of Greek mythology:
The up-and-down motion executes the nitrogen wave,
The forward motion, making the foot-prints, is the oxygen
wave,
The straight line, marking the distance, the carbon wave,
The spiral the turning point or termination.
The outer man —the physical body, is of necessity, the
greater visible revelation, but is secondary to the organic man,
who constructs and maintains him.
Nevertheless, the physical man is an essential servant of
the organic man. The latter could not exist without this
service.
This suggests a Biblical similitude.
"Japheth shall dwell in the tent of Shem, and Ham shall
be their servant." (Gen. 9-27).
The tent of Shem is the skin.
Ham is the skeleton, the bones, hence Ham carries all
the burdens of the physical body.
The skeleton assumes many important functions, assum
ing suggestive forms corresponding with these functions.
The rounded skull protects the electronic brain.
The spinal column protects the nitrogenous spinal cord.
The curved ribs protect the thoracic, oxygenic organs.
The large bones protect the hydrogenous marrow.
A special school should be established for the education
of all humanity in a revelation of the purpose of his creation.
Noah Shem
Brain Flesh
Japheth
Muscle
Ham
Bones
The Last Word 31
It is the most simple and appealing contact with true wisdom
to be found.
A full revelation of the truth would bring all men to a
realization that, it is an essential part of the great creative
scheme that they perfect themselves as Nature intended they
should be, and stand as perfect units of the whole.
We are not exceeding our rights of free-speech, when we
declare as our opinion, from long study of the problem, that
greater humanity has been deliberately led into a wilderness
of beastly ignorance and confusion, to blind it to the true
purposes of life, by a mean, designing, contemptible, selfish
force, in order to swindle it as Jacob robbed his brother Esau
of joy, prosperity, intelligence, and understanding, for its own
glorification and luxurious support.
Jacob's reward was, he became Israel.
In the code, today, Israel means the Church of Christ,
and Esau means the producing humanity supporting the church.
TO KNOW MAN IS TO KNOW ALL
There are four distinct personalities in the ensemble of
the perfected human being, which must be recognized as in
dividual, because of the definite functions assigned to each in
the construction and maintenance of the whole body.
But, in their co-operative duties they blend into the com
posite man, in such strict relations to a controlling mentation,
every thought and action of the whole being is a culminating
fruit of a preconceived impulse, arising in a controlling center.
If any one of these well-defined personalities fails to func
tion in unison with the whole system, they all fail, and the
system dies.
Each resides in its own physical structure and receives
its impulse from its own organic center which gives it its
aspect of individuality, but back of this impulse is a poten
tiality which binds them all together as one composite being.
We may quickly recognize the physical body as the visible
culmination of the series of creative waves revealed by the
gnostic philosophy.
32 The Last Word
The four departments of this body have been previously
described as seats of inspiration, execution, and control, in
the acquirement of mental and physical nourishment, and
their dispensation, giving to these sense centres an aspect of
individual personality.
THE FOUR PERSONALITIES
The Flesh Man, with the brain as his executive head, and
the head as his protecting walls. Here the brain sits as the
supreme ruler of all. It broadcasts its powers through a well-
defined nervous system which reaches every tissue of the
human body, in their minutest detail. The spinal nerves,
and the sympathetic nerves, are the carriers of mentation,
therefore they represent the nitrogenous wave, coming out of
the electronic brain,
Q^\^^^3
The Muscular Man, with the heart as his executive head,
and the thorax as his seat of power. Here he sits as the
director of the distribution of the breath of life. An equally
elaborate system of circulation, the arteries and veins, reach
ing every living tissue, holding them under control for phys
ical activities. Its intricate system of circulation of the
blood, represents the oxygen wave, /aiaa^^,^
It is at once seen that the master-power, with his elec
tronic seat in the head and brain, has projected these two
waves to perform the most vital and essential functions in
the human body, therefore they are constructive agents.
The Bone Man, the skeleton, the servant to both the
Flesh Man, and the Muscle Man, carrying all the burdens of
the whole physical and organic structure, taking direct orders
from the Muscle Man. The bones represent the carbon wave,
mm © symbolizing a state of exhaustion.
The stomach especially deals with the solids and fluids,
therefore the Bone Man is the earthy, abdominal agent. The
motion of digestion in the stomach is spiral, therefore the
abdomen and its organs symbolize the land and the sea; this
reveals the hydrogen spiral at the end of the process, @
The Last Word 33
The Lymphatic Woman, with the pelvis as her seat, is
the female principle in nature, giving birth fo the prepared
living elements for the maintenance of the physical tissues.
Lymph means water, therefore this properly symbolizes
the Hydrogen spiral which is the true first living molecule of
matter.
The marrow is involved in this, but its participation is
wholly concealed. It becomes the reconstructive food for
mentation, hence it represents the completion of the creative
cycle,
Q and symbolizes orbital motion.
Naturally, the seat of the female principle is the pelvis,
and the active functions are excrementitious —the excretion of
both dead matter and reproductive matter.
Now we may vision the wonderful symbolism of creative
nature as revealed by this composite man.
A true "image and likeness."
Inner Organic Man Outer Physical Man
Electron Brain Heart Stomach Molecule Bone Muscle Flesh Corpuscle
Nerves Blood Lymph Abdomen Thorax Head
It is observable that the three essential elements — the
electron, the molecule, and the corpuscle, which traverse the
whole system do not directly attach themselves to the trinity
of constructive tissues, due to the fact they are in a state of
constant change.
The electron contains all of the positive waves.
The corpuscle contains, by absorption, all of the negative waves.
The molecule is a state of balance between the positive and
negative.
We may now vision the secret, inner processes of all
nature :
The electron is the unit of mentation in the brain.
The molecule is the unit of living tissues in stomach. @
The corpuscle is the unit of life in the heart. Q
We have here living symbols of vital planetary attitudes.
34 The /Last Word
The reflective moori 'principle. \
The axial motion of. our planet.: ., : : ,-j -: .!■
The orbital motion bf our planet. vr!
This reveals (he basi^ sources of all the basic creative
principles in nature. i
We previously said, the spiral, originally, was a motion
of the sun, before the completion of the planetary body about
it,
but now the sun, in its relations to these bodies,
is
in
,
a
fixed state, and the planets revolve about the sun in fixed
orbits.
The moons, in their orbital motions about the planets,
symbolize orbital motion, hence the moon
is
a
perfected body
cf its system, therefore
is
a
unit of planetary mentation, cor
roborating our former deductions regarding the moon prin
ciple as
a
reflecting force!
:
As perfected mankind assumes an independent tendency
to wander at will upon the earth's surface, doubtless, untold
numbers of planetary systems, in like manner wander through
the limitless universal space.
.
'
The stars which we see in the heavens are the suns of
similar systems.
As the heart of man
is
limited in its functions in the
body of which
it
is
the living centre, so are the suns limited
in their powers to the planetary systems of which they are
the .pulsating hearts sending forth life.
As men upon our planet associate themselves together,
to exchange wisdom, and absorb, one from another, the ben
efits of the living state, doubtless, planetary systems, in like
manner, ma.ke similar exchanges, as we recognize the exchanges
between our own planets, through the reflective powers of
their moons, as representing the symbol of electronic men
tation, which
is
the universal mentation.
As we recognize the nitrogen ring, and the oxygen spiral,
as symbols of the moon and sun in our atmosphere, we may
know, beyond doubt, the source of our mentation and life.
These are universal forces, therefore,
it
is
most essen-
tion that the atmosphere which we breathe should be pure
The Last Word 35
and unadulterated, and the material nourishment to sustain
our physical bodies equally so.
A single verse in the Bible reveals the pilfering plagiari-
zation of this gnostic wisdom.
OvAAT-^-^
Noah Shem Japheth Ham Canaan
Brain Flesh Muscle Bone
"God shall enlarge Japheth and he shall dwell in the tents
of Shem; and Canaan (Ham) shall be his servant." (Gen.
9:27.)
Noah means the place or seat of God, the brain. Shem
means the flesh. The tent of Shem is the skin. Japheth means
the muscles. Ham means the bones, the servant, carrying all
the burdens of the body. Canaan, the offspring of this servi
tude, means merchandising and trading —mental and physical
exchanges.
THE CONFISCATION AND SUPPRESSION OF THE
GNOSTIC WISDOM
Our brief revelation of the traditional gnostic wisdom now
becomes a witness against the most vicious usurpation of the
natural rights of humanity recorded in history.
Through all ages mankind had sought to pay tribute to
the great power in universal nature, which had chosen to select
him as the highest product of this earth, giving to him power
to think and reason above all other animal kinds. His grati
tude was based upon the truth, that he, of all living creatures,
could recognize a logical purpose in his creation ; he was the
visible "image and likeness" of his invisible creator, and he
had access to the concealed mysteries of the inner man —the
living contact. Hence, practically all religions have worshiped
invisible nature as a God.
Over endless centuries, tradition substantially recorded
the enlightenment of mankind to the truth, they were
36 The Last Word
the revealed images of the mysterious power which had cre
ated them. It was not an individuality until the revelation of
the unit man. All fully developed men are equal until de
prived of their normal, natural rights.
Gnosticism, meaning to know, was the first and only true
religion of those in whom the truth and understanding were
awakened, and the earnest search after enlightenment was an
inspiration, until a usurpative Ecclesia intruded upon the world
a fake religion, based upon the gnostic system, disguised by
symbols, figures and personifications, in order to steal and
commercialize the true gnostic wisdom, philosophy and science.
The christian religion is a rank imposter, seeking to
destroy the rights of all men to acquire enlightenment, that
it might erect an imperialistic authority over the world. This
is fully exposed by its own secret code.
It required five hundred years for the ecclesiastic plotters
against nature and mankind to confiscate and absorb gnosti
cism as its own, and to degrade the greater humanity in a
thousand years of abject ignorance (486 to 1495).
This is authentic history which not even the church dis
putes.
This horrible condition was maintained by murderous
popes, inspired, so-called crusades, in which unknown millions
of innocent men, women and children were sacrificed to clean-
cut church fraud and false pretense.
And the horrible so-named inquisition, also inspired by
the catholics, which murdered, maimed, mutilated and burned,
it is estimated, fifty million innocent people.
No wars ever waged by armies could approach these
church crimes in cruelty.
The vile human skunks insulted nature, by assuming that
she did not know how to perfect here own creations designed
to reflect her purposes.
Now, the day of vengeance shall arise, and the resurrected
gnostic wisdom shall smite these thieving usurpers with blind
ness, and expose to the world their plagiarizations from all
previous forms of religion.
The Last Word 37
Their fake Jesus will rise up and laugh them to scorn.
Their appointed Christs shall be kicked from office, and
decent, honest men will take bewildered humanity by the hand
and lead it out of the wilderness.
Before we close this story of confiscation, we feel it our
duty to expose some of its trickery. We have said that the
nitrogen wave symbolizes God, and the oxygen wave the Christ.
"God is the father of Christ" (John 9:69).
Christ declares :
"I and my father are one" (John 10:30).
The oxygen wave is born out of the nitrogen wave. Nit
rogen and oxygen constitute our atmosphere. We inhale these
as our breath which becomes the agent of our speech.
"In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God" (Jno. 1:1).
Hence Christ is made to say: "My father and I are one."
"No one hath seen God at any time, save the son who is in
the bosom of the father. He hath declared him." (Jno. 1 :18.)
"Christ is the son of the living God" (1 Cor. 3 :23). Light.
"Christ gives light" (Eph. 5:15)— the sun.
"The same was in the beginning with God" (Jno. 1
:2)
in the electron.
"All things were made by him" (Jno. 1:3).
"In him was life, and the life was the light of all men"
"God is all and in all. Christ is all and in all" (Col. 3 :11).
oxygen, Christ.
Nitrogen, the first wave coming out of the electron, con
tains oxygen, carbon and hydrogen, hence, God is all and in
all, merely assuming different forms.
In the creation of planetary systems the spiral represents
the suns as creative centers, and subsequent creative systems
assume the spiral as a life centre.
"I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end" (Rev.
21:6).
(Jno. 1:4).
revealed through
38 The Last Word
The Gnostic God of Christianity
"God is Jehovah" (Isa. 12:2), meaning ever-existent.
"John baptized with water" ( Jno. 1
:26) ; water means
the multitudes.
"Jesus baptized with the holy-ghost," meaning the breath,
words.
"The woman is of the man, also the man is of the woman"
(1 Cor. 11:12).
Could anything be made plainer ?
Man Woman Man
"And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the son also, himself, be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all" (1 Cor. 15:28).
--11^1^^^^ iu.i UBaO-^-VyV^
God Christ Jesus Jesus Christ God
"Jesus comes from God and returneth to God" (Jno.
13:3).
THE USURPATION
In adopting the word Catholic, meaning universal, as the
name of their concealing church, the ecclesiasts had planned
a scheme of empire of far greater proportions than the mere
uniting of all the more important religions into one composite
body.
The walls of the Pantheon, in Rome, that gloomy struc
ture of unknown origin, covered with the gods of all religions,
is a key to a vastly greater enterprise than the control or sup
pression of religious bodies.
The adoption of the name Ecclesia is quite sufficient to
brand the organization as a thing of plunder.
The Last Word 39
The legislative body of ancient Athens was named the
Ecclesia. It confiscated all private property by a vicious form
of taxation, and smothered the people under a blanket of mur
derous laws.
The Greek system of mythology was founded upon uni
versal principles, covering earth and sky, with its innumerable
gods and goddesses. It was more of an educational science
than a system of religion. Wisdom was the goal of the Greek
system, therefore it was closely allied with the traditional
gnosticism.
The greed, and selfish determination to hog it all, has
always been the weakest trait of the ecclesiastical - church
scheme.
All bodies attempting to organize an independent system,
must, of necessity, adopt the positive, creative waves, before
they may develop material bodies of their own conception,
independent of previously organized systems.
In the plagiarization of the Greek mythology, ecclesiasti-
cism could not conceal its own secret code. It boldly gave
to this planetary system names which were a descriptive part
of the Greek gnostic system, and then attempted to construct
a universal source for its own classification of humanity.
We here apply the universal waves to our planetary sys
tem to illustrate this.
OvAAT-
Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars
It is at once recognized that this positive, creative motion
was the source of our planet, therefore it could not be tam
pered with.
It is the negative system which gives the opportunity for
trickery.
o • • . •• • ■- "
V O " i »vnv
**** /
' -
Mars Asteroids Jupiter Saturn Uranus
40 The Last Word
The carbon wave coming out of Mars is the asteroidal
belt, having no organized body. It is the refuse or excrement
of the positive system, cast out of it. Only constant toil and
cultivation can revive
it,
therefore
it
is
abandoned to fate in
the imitation.
The spiral, as we have previously shown, symbolizes the
pelvis and its excreting organs.
The appearance of the surface of Mars
is,
that
it
is
prac
tically all water, which
is
symbolized by the spiral. Doubtless
this condition
is
due to the casting out of the asteroidal frag
ments. The small size of Mars also intimates this.
The asteroidal belt may well be called the bones of this
planetary system, separating the outer planets from the inner.
Jupiter, true to the oxygen wave,
is
a
vast gaseous body
of oxygen.
Let us now examine how the ecclesiasts made use of a
knowledge of the gnostic astronomy, by trying to give to the
Greek mythology, which
it
had plagiarized for its own usurpa-
tive ends, an aspect of originality, by applying the names of
Greek gods to the planets, in a consecutive manner, to tell
the most vulgar story in the christian system.
In the positive series of waves, the spiral always follows
carbon, and symbolizes water, the sea.
Mer—mere, means the sea.
Mary
is
derived from mere, the sea.
Mary
is
the alleged mother of Jesus.
Mary also symbolizes the church.
Jesus symbolizes the humblest class of people, producing
mankind.
Je means ever-existent, sus means sustainer, supporter.
The name Jesus
is
the Greek form of Joshua, brought
over from the old testament.
Jo means increased, shua means wealth.
Increased wealth, the savior of the Jews.
It
is
an evident fact that, in order to create an exclusive
body to be later known as the universal church the humble,
earthy masses must be eliminated, hence the sacrifice of Jesus,
The Last Word 41
the producing masses, and the adoption of Christ, authority,
as the head of the church.
In the classifying of the people, under the jurisdiction of
the Ecclesia, this is the romantic procedure :
Church Rabble Authority Pope Ecclesia
Mary Jesus Christ God Heaven
"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth"
(Gen. 1:1).
"And the earth was without form and void" (Gen. 1 :2).
This clears it up. The secret ecclesiastic code speaks.
Heaven means ecclesiastical government.
Earth means the rabble, the producing mankind.
There are many accusing evidences exposed. In the
original manuscripts, from which the first ten words of the
Bible were taken, the words God and Heaven were in the
plural, giving to the verse a wholly different significance.
All men were gods, and their governments were their
heavens.
By their abuse of translation they convert the people into
an ignorant, unorganized rabble, which must be removed from
between God and the church. Nevertheless, this rabble is the
producing masses, therefore it may not be destroyed. In the
further play with the gnostic waves, they assimilate, devour
and digest this surplus. It becomes the sustainer of the church.
See how perfectly the negative waves reveal this.
According to the natural creative trend, only the nega
tive waves may be applied in the development of this human
enterprise. As we have previously shown, each element born
out of the spiral, feeds upon the excrements of the preceding
wave. This would make the rabble an excrement of the sea,
or the church, Christ, would be supported by the excrement
of the rabble, and God would be sustained by Christ, authority.
It is at once seen that this is the beginning of the struggle
42 The Last Word
of the church to seize control of the people and their gov
ernments.
, To destroy civil governments, it Was essential for the
church to absorb the producing masses upon which civil gov
ernments depended for support. This could not be done to
adjust the act to the negative set of waves.
To give to the church earthy supremacy, it was essen
tial to base the ecclesiastic government, and its church, upon
the positive waves.
Therefore, "God made man in his image."
"And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness."
"And God created man in his own image, in the image
of God created he him, male and female created he them"
(Gen. 1:26, 27).
This necessarily implies that God is both male and fe
male. Moreover it means civil government and the church.
This godly creation now assumes a positive process, plac
ing the church in a position to control the masses of people,
as represented by the carbon line backing out of the spiral.
This is the birth of Jesus out of Mary. Mere—the sea,
Jesus is the earthy producing mankind, to be sacrificed, cruci
fied and resurrected.
Je means ever-existent, sus means sustain, support.
The ecclesia has now taken man as the image and like
ness of the universal creative process.
Jesus symbolizes the muscular system.
The cross is the human skeleton with arms outstretched.
The muscular Jesus is hanged upon the skeleton, being
suspended from Calvary, which in the code means the base of
the skull.
This fake sacrifice is but the sacrifice of human muscular
energy to support the ecclesiastic government, and the church,
man being merely used as a symbol.
In making this sacrifice, which removes the masses of
people as an obstacle between the church and God, the pro
moters of the scheme show an utter contempt for the com
The Last Word 43
mon, producing people, by figuratively converting them into
the waste excrement of the planetary system, by using our
planets, giving them names expressly to tell the vulgar story.
Mars Asteroids Jupiter Saturn Uranus
We have previously shown, that in the negative set of
creative waves the heads of the serpents point toward the
spiral, revealing that each element in the series is nourished
and sustained by the excrements of the preceding wave.
The normal position of the negative carbon wave follows
the spiral.
The spiral symbolizes the sea, the waters.
Waters means the multitudes of people.
And here is the vulgar manner in which the church dis
posed of the troublesome masses.
The Jews and Peter (Jupiter) sat (upon an) urn (saturn)
and discharged the refuse of the body with ur-ine from the
anus (Uranus) the excremental orifice.
It is a curious thing that the urine is an excrement of
the kidneys, and is here united with the excretions of the anus.
The planet Neptune was not discovered until 1846, hence
it is not included in this fake planetary scheme.
Neptune is alleged to be a dual planet, resembling a pair
of kidneys. Little more is known or said about this planet.
It is peculiar, too, that the substance discharged from
the anus is inclined to assume a spiral form, again intimating
the symbol of the multitudes.
It will be observed that, in order to accomplish this trans
fer of position of the producing class, necessitated an adverse
attitude of the negative waves which ordinarily begin with
negative carbon and end with negative nitrogen.
This proves that they used the physical body of man, the
"image of God" as its model instead of the planetary system.
Before illustrating this we shall examine the mythological
names they selected for this purpose.
44 The Last Word
Jesus is said to have been the son of one Pan-ther, or
Pan-theos, meaning "all the gods."
Jesus was named Rabbi-Ben-Pantheos.
Therefore, it was the offspring of all previous gods which
they sought to eliminate, proving, beyond all doubt, that they
were suppressing all previous religions, and plagiarizing such
of their rites as suited their purposes, as they had suppressed
the traditional gnosticism and confiscated its wisdom to ex
ploit as its own.
Their first attempt was to combine all religions, with
their gods, into one universal body, hence, they adopted the
name catholic which means universal.
Pan means all. Theon means gods.
The most eloquent evidence of this brazen attempt to
suppress all the previous religions of the world, to enable them
to assume universal control of all mankind, stands as a tot
tering old bone-shed for saints, in Rome.
The Pan-theon, with its walls smeared with the gods of
all previous religions, and bins filled with the rotting bones
of alleged saints.
No one can positively name the time when this structure
was erected.
To the writer, who visited
it,
it
was the most disgusting
thing in Rome.
Now for the names we were to analyze.
Jupiter, the Jews, and Peter, papa, pope.
Right at once he identifies himself in the spot where we
had placed him in the elimination of the masses.
Jupiter
is
Merodach, the rooter out of all the evil ones.
He shepherds the stars.
He pastures the gods like sheep.
He rules the night.
He
is
the deity of wind, rain, and thunder.
Wind means war.
Rain means doctrines.
Thunder means god's anger.
Je the ever-existent
is
Ju in Jupiter.
The Last Word 45
Piter is peter, papa, pope.
Jupiter is credited as having three eyes, the third, the
inner eye of reason.
Saturn, the reign of Saturn called the golden age. He is
Cronus, time.
Kranos = ak. Ur = the great fire. On-us = the one
light.
Set-ur-cn, the fiery one.
Set = et = light and heat.
Uranus. Ur = fire. Anus = excremental orifice.
The Scotch Ure = the Hebrew Ur = fire.
Anu = a long flowing beard.
S = the spiral.
This at once identifies Uranus as the terminating pelvis
of the planetary man.
In the adoption of the human body, as the image and
likeness of the planetary scheme, we are brought into close
contact with the real truth.
They assumed control over the inner, organic man.
Brain Heart Stomach Bladder
Head Thorax Abdomen Pelvis
Moon Sun Earth Sea
Seat of God Seat of Christ Seat of Man Seat of Woman
Pope Priest People Church
The Last Word
The First Adam, Negative Read from spiral upward
Fruit . O*
Leaves
Limbs
Trunk
Root
Seth—Respira
tory Animals
Able —Breath
Cain —Atmosphere
Adam —Earth
Eve — Sea, Life
The Second Adam, Positive Read downward
Head I 1 Noah
Brain Nerves — Shem.
Heart Blood— Japheth
Stomach Bone —Ham
Bladder Marrow —Canaan
The Last Word 47
The first man Adam was a living soul, of the earth' earthy.
The last Adam was made a quickening spirit, the Lord
from heaven.
Noah means seat of God. Lord means loaf-warden —
bread giver.
The Moon—reproduces the electron with an orbit.
The Sun, the first physical product of this system inhales
its sustaining elements from the universal pabulum.
The Earth is the exhaust of the first universal positive
motion, depositing its waste as the asteroids.
The Sea is the first molecule of living matter, hence life
begins in the waters.
There are twenty moons attached to the planets of this
system.
There are twenty imitations on the human fingers and
toes, by which we may recognize the functions of the moons —
the nails.
As the moons belong to their planets, yet are not directly
attached, so do the nails belong to the bony structure but are
not directly attached.
The moons are sent forth to gather planetary mentation
for their planets.
The hands, arms, legs and feet are sent forth to find and
seize physical nourishment for the physical body, all of-which
must first be sent to the head to be censored before being ab
sorbed.
Food for the brain is universal. Food for the heart is
atmospheric. Food for the stomach is from land and sea.
The pelvic organs discharge the wastes of the bodily ac
tivities, and living, reproductive bodies.
In the christian scheme this excretion is classed as the
productive mankind, the lowest type of humanity, based upon
the fact that the animal excretions cultivate the soil. Men
are called cattle, meaning capital.
We may now indulge in some Biblical quotations which
will emphasize the church plagiarization of the gnostic wis
dom.
48 The Last Word
"The woman is of the man and the man is of the woman"
(1 Cor. 11:12).
Could anything be plainer?
Man Woman Man
"God is one" (Gal. 3:20).
Christ is called the son of man eighty times in the Bible.
Mary Jesus Christ
The total number of names and titles given to Jesus Christ
ill the Bible are one hundred ninety-nine.
God declares:
"I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end" (Rev.
21:6).
God Christ Man Woman Man Christ God
"And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the son also, himself, be subject unto him that put all
things under him that God may be all in all" (1 Cor. 15:28).
God, Christ Christ, God
Christ is the Hebrew messiah, brought over from the
old testament, as Jesus is Joshua brought over.
"God enters our hearts by the holy ghost, which is given
unto us" (Rom. 5:6).
Holy Ghost means breath —the atmosphere (N40).
This definitely identifies the nitrogen we breathe from
our atmosphere as the God principle.
In the negative waves the wave of nitrogen, representing
the god principle, is converted into a negative electron assum
ing an orbital attitude. This is the perfected moon of our
planetary system, and it is through its functions, previously
described, that we are put in contact with planetary wisdom.
The Last Word 49
"God is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (Eph. 1
:3).
Therefore, when the name Lord is mentioned it means
the Christ, high official authority.
This is merely a formality in which authority is personi
fied into a personality.
In the first verse of the new testament is the following
absurd statement:
"Jesus Christ, the son of David."
"Jesus Christ, the son of Abraham" (Matt. 1:1).
This at once identifies God, David and Abraham as one,
for this Christ character could not possibly be the offspring
of three different fathers.
These are serious discrepancies which put the stamp of
romance and false-pretense upon the whole Biblical story.
"One God and father of all" (Eph. 4:6).
"Abraham who is father of us all" (Rom. 4:16).
Again we are reminded that Abraham and God are one.
"Call no man your father upon the earth" (Matt. 23:9).
Now we know the fabulous character of these Biblical per
sonalities.
Every catholic priest is called "father" on this earth.
Christianity practically begins with Abram, Abraham and
Isaac.
Abram came out of Ur, meaning fire.
He was the high-priest of fire-worship.
Ab means father, ram means high.
The name was changed to Abraham.
Ab means father. Ra means the sun. Ham means hot.
The high-priest of the hot sun —sun-worship.
Isaac, son of Abraham, means joy, light, laughter, en
lightenment. He is the first Christ.
"Christ gives light" (Eph. 5:15).
"In him was life and life was the light of all men" (Jno.
1-4).
"Christ is our life" (Col. 3:4) r«*^^^^«3> oxygen.
"Christ is all and in all" (Col. 3:11). Hence man is the
manifested God.
50 The Last Word
"Jesus Christ is in you" (Gal. 13:5). An attempt to
identify these as one.
"Jesus said: Is it not written in your law, I said ye are
gods?" (Jno. 10:34).
"Christ Jesus is wisdom" (1 Cor. 1
:30).
This is another raw attempt to identify Jesus and Christ
as one, whereas Jesus is but the Greek name for Joshua, mean
ing increased wealth. But the christian Jesus merely means
the ever-existent producer, and supporter of the church, the
laboring masses.
"The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ"
(Rom. 6:23).
Through hard physical labor and church authority.
It is Peter, the church, that said:
"Jesus is the Christ" (Mark 8:29).
Whereas Jesus declares he is but an ordinary man.
The head of every man is Christ, the head of every
woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God. This
reverses the negative waves into the positive for church pur
poses.
God, the head of Christ, the head of Man, the head of Woman
"Jesus is the light of the world" (Jno. 1 :12). Mankind.
"God is light" (Jno. 1
:5). Light is intellect.
"Ye are the temple of God, the spirit of God dwelleth
in you" (1 Cor. 3:16).
Oxygen, the spirit or life principle, comes first out of the
nitrogen wave, the god principle.
"Jesus Christ, the son of God is the word" (Jno. 1:1).
Human speech.
"In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God" (Jno. 1:1).
"Our words are the images of our thoughts" (Col. 1 :15).
This wholly clears up this mysterious juggling of words.
The brain is the seat of mentation.
The Last Word 51
The heart is the seat of expression.
It all has reference to the organic and physical man.
"God reveals his will through Jesus Christ" (Jno. 3:34).
God IS tne first force manifesting in the
creative system. He manifests through light, the original
Christ principle, ^-"a^^^^sxo oxygen, intelligence, knowl
edge, therefore intelligent understanding and reason is the
God principle in man.
This especially refers to the inner or organic man, and
they are revealed through the outer, physical man.
The female principle in nature, as symbolized by the
hydrogen spiral, is the virgin Mary.
Mary is from Mer, the sea.
Animal life originates in the sea, the waters.
This revelation is demonstrated by the unfolding of the
secondary or negative set of creative waves.
Respiratory
Sea Earth Vegetation Animals Reproduction
The ecclesiasts attempt to make of man a special dispensa
tion in Enos, the son of Seth, who represents the respiratory
animals. The spiral reveals the axial motion, and the circle
the orbital motion of our earth.
There is endless evidence that these similarities are but
the clumsy adjustments of the ecclesiastical enterprise to the
traditional gnostic system. It needs no discussion. The single
fact that gnosticism existed ages before christianity was con
ceived, and it required five hundred years for the ecclesia to
throttle
it,
and confiscate its wisdom as
it
own,
is
sufficient.
This outrageous thing was a premeditated assault upon
progressive civilization and, as we have repeatedly declared,
the horrible state of imbecilic ignorance was its shield.
This suppression of intellect in the greater masses was
the true crucifixion of the imaginary Jesus.
To this day, this beastly assault upon common sense and
52 The Last Word
reason is reflected in a determination, on the part of the cath
olic church, to prevent the use of the Bible in the public
schools, and to suppress the teaching in the public schools
of science and philosophy.
Secret attempts have been made to seize secret control
of and censorship of text books used in our schools.
This is a part of the original scheme. Following the
crucifixion, the alleged resurrection was to be an educated
church following, superior to the common producing herd.
Perhaps the most impudent attitude of the catholic church
today, is the determined effort to compel state treasuries to
support parochial schools.
A brief survey of this situation reveals a treacherous in
difference, on the part of political powers in control of our
governments, toward the suppression of this manifest en
croachment upon the national educational prerogatives, strongly
suggestive of collusion.
As originally intended, education will be made a mere
bribe.
Today, inspired governmental cruelties are intended to
drive humanity into the church.
"The law is our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ"
(Gal. 3:24).
The United States is smothered beneath a blanket of laws.
THE USURPATIVE CHURCH PLAGIARIZATIONS
It is to emphasize its vast importance to humanity, and
to normal, logical, reasonable human advancement, that we
dwell upon the gnostic theme.
The negative half of the creative wave system speaks
loudest in the story of christian plagiarizations.
Readjustment of waves to meet church imitation.
Ur Abram Isaac Jacob Israel
Fire Fire-worship Light-worship Usurpation Church of
Christ
The Last Word 53
Thus they adopt the first motion of the sun, the spiral
beginning, as the origin of all natural religions, and the be
ginning of the systems of nature-worship which they confis
cate and conceal behind a church-wall of figure, symbolism,
and personification.
The word church is from Chur = the guardian of the
sun. Ur means fire.
Abram came out of Ur fire, of Chaldee, devils and rob
bers.
Isaac comes out of Abram, fire, high-priest of fire-wor
ship.
Isaac means light, joy, prosperity, intelligence.
This has a secret reference to the origin of the gnostic
system, which is based upon the revelations of light and se
lective reason.
"God did tempt Abraham" (Gen. 22:1).
To sacrifice his "only son," Isaac, by burning with fire.
Fire-worship had been displaced by sun-worship, Abram,
the high-priest of fire-worship becoming Ab-ra-ham, the high-
priest of sun-worship.
Ab means father, ram means high.
The modern catholic priests are called "fathers."
This is the ram which God found to be sacrificed instead
of Isaac.
And Abram became Ab—the father, Ra—the sun, Ham—
hot. The high-priest of the hot sun, and Isaac, light, joy,
prosperity, and enlightenment, was spared. A simple scheme
was devised to absorb the gnostic wisdom.
Esau and Jacob are the sons of Isaac.
Esau means the earthy, producing masses.
Jacob means to usurp by trickery.
Jacob's mother is Rebekah, meaning snare, trap.
Ja means Jehovah. Cob = Cobus, the insidious supplanter.
Jacob also is Ja-ztak, meaning the supreme ensnarer.
"Thy word is the supreme ensnarer of heaven and earth"
(The Book of Souls).
The soul is the breath.
54 The Last Word
The Ecclesia, plagiarized by the christian scheme, was
the name of the legislative body of ancient Athens, which
confiscated all the property of the common people by taxa
tion, as the United States is doing today by the influence of
the modern ecclesiasticism.
Where a thousand years of abject ignorance under ecclesi
asticism held the producing classes under control, and another
thousand years of murderous crusades, inquisitions, and bloody
wars frightened them into a state of submission, a new form
of mental and physical slavery has seized control; taxation
and poverty have subdued the "rabble."
Carbon is the product of heat-exhaustion.
Nitrogen and oxygen ride on the back of carbon, as the
flesh and muscles ride the bones of the body. Truly Ham
is the servant of Shem and Japheth.
Church
Thus does the mythological caduceus reveal the modern
ecclesiastical treachery.
The producing class carries both the church and state,
as God declared that Ham should bear the burdens of his
brothers, and that means that human toil is feeding and cloth
ing, and supporting in luxury and ease, the indolent official
classes and the confiscatory, usurpative priesthood.
God manifests in the flesh. Dictator.
Christ manifests in the muscles. Executioner.
Man manifests in the bones. Producer.
Woman manifests in the marrow. Reproducer.
These are the four primary elements which manifest in
the human physical body.
Hydrogen symbolizes water.
Waters symbolize the multitude of people and laws.
Hence we are again in the midst of a flood in the United
States.
c
0
Bones —the
People
Mnsles —
the Civil
Govern
ment
The Last Word 55
The muscles direct the labors of the bones.
It is the flesh which absorbs the surplus elements, hence
the pot-bellied priesthood, who neither toil nor pay taxes,
absorb the excess human energy.
"God manifests in the flesh" (1 Tim. 3:16).
Thus the gross physical body reveals the mysteries for
bidden the ignorant masses, because a knowledge of the se
crets of the organic man would reveal ecclesiastic duplicity.
The God, Christ, male and female principles are the four
essential elements in the construction of this fake christian
system, and these are confiscated from the gnostic philosophy
—the wisdom belonging to all humanity alike.
"God comes as a thief in the night" (Rev. 3:3).
These four principles are as manifest in other animals
as in man, and even in the vegetation, but man is the last
word in physical creation. Man is the manifested god —every
man.
Angels find no place to rest their weary wings upon this
earth, therefore we do not find them prowling about looking
for "soup-lines" and "bean-tickets." They are quickly con
cealed in convents and nunneries, to entertain the priesthood.
But to go to the Vatican, at Rome, and you may be per
mitted to kiss the dirty feet of God—the pope.
Or slip into the confessional, and you may embrace the
fat-bellied Jesus —the priest.
If civilization is to continue, this brazen false-pretense
must be rudely suppressed.
THE BIBLE
What power maintains the circulation of this textbook of
evil?
The church, associated with Jesuitic, political influences
over civil governments.
Humanity at large has been the victim of this collusive
influence since the introduction of so-called christianity.
The very fact that the ulterior church exploiters conceal
56 The Last Word
themselves, and their true character, behind a screen of sym
bolisms, and false-pretense, by the use of a secret code, is
quite sufficient to prove they are not dealing honestly with
the ignorant masses. Honest purpose requires no secrecy or
concealment. Wild beasts and treachery always conceal them
selves in ambush to pounce upon their prey.
The Bible, without which the church could not exist, is
the most profane, untruthful, inconsistent, selfish and crim
inal piece of literature ever permitted to circulate among the
people. Its contradictions are endless.
It originally was forbidden to circulate, by the church
itself. Many people were burned when found with a Bible
in their possession.
This horrid thing teaches lying, stealing, false-pretense
and crime in every degree, when done with the knowledge
and consent of the church, or for its benefit.
The leading characters in the book, from its fake god
down, are openly charged with every crime known to the
calendar of crimes of the present day.
Let those capable of thinking and reasoning draw their
own conclusions regarding why this vile text-book of the
church is permitted to remain in circulation, rather than ac
cuse our government of wilful collusion. Search out those
who disgrace our government by secret connivance with this
usurpative power.
The constitution of the United States declares, in its first
amendment, that no law shall be passed having reference to
religion.
Our early presidents construed this to mean that the laws
should not recognize the church and religion as an element to
influence civil government. They sharply vetoed every bill
presented for their approval having any reference to the church
and many attempts were made to defeat this constitutional
provision.
Our early treaties with foreign nations declared: "This
government was, in no sense, founded upon religion."
Nowhere, in the declaration or constitution, does the name
The Last Word 57
God appear, with the single exception: the "God of nature,"
and the "laws of nature" are mentioned once in the declara
tion.
The constitution specifically declares: "No religious test
shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or pub
lic trust."
Yet we see the presidents of this nation, and other offi
cials, with their hands upon this Bible, taking their oath of
office.
If a proper construction be placed upon the 18th amend
ment to our constitution, and its subsequent repeal, it would
reveal a raw attempt to overcome the attitude of the constitu
tion, in its first amendment, to force a recognition of the
church, by exempting the Jews and the christian church.
It reflects no credit upon the government responsible for
this deal, that it commercialized it to the limit, by developing
an outrageous system of taxation, disgusting to common sense
and reason.
It is only too true, that this system of abnormal taxation
applies to every luxury, and every vital necessity, naturally
belonging to the people, reflecting a clean-cut, ecclesiastical
usurpation.
Necessity, luxury, crime and poverty are now openly com
mercialized to the extreme of confiscation, betraying the spirit
of the ravenous ecclesia back of the church.
Returning to our story of the Bible :
Because it conceals much plagiarized gnostic wisdom,
much of which may be traced back to the Hindoo age of
reason and philosophy, does not excuse making of the Bible
a text book to exploit evil and crime, as an excuse for the
maintenance of the elaborate church exploitation.
In the United States, today, we are being smothered in
criminal laws, to foster a modern form of the murderous in
quisition, which terrorized all Europe in the middle ages, mur
dering more than fifty millions of innocent people, because
they refused to recognize and support a fictitious religion.
If the government permits the free circulation of the
58 The Last Word
Bible, it is an endorsement of its treacherous teachings. Then,
why does it openly violate its tenets?
"Where there is no law there is no transgression" (Rom.
4:15).
"Sin is the transgression of the law" (1 John 3:4).
Then it is clear that a multitude of vicious, irritating
laws are made to promote evil.
There can be but one legitimate purpose, and that is to
commercialize evil for the profit it yields. The Bible teaches
this.
"Either make the tree (man) good, and his fruit good,
or else make the tree (man) corrupt, and his fruit corrupt;
for the tree (man) is known by his fruit" (Matt. 12:33).
If this is not the cultivation of corruption for the profit
it yields, then name it.
If there remains any doubt, the following will remove it.
"Now we know that what things soever the law saith,
it saith to them who are under the law; that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty" (Rom.
3:19).
Thus free speech is suppressed, and all mankind is leg
islated into crime.
A multitude of laws is not for the good of mankind, they
are for the promotion of evil.
"By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justi
fied; for by the law is the knowledge of sin" (Rom. 3 :20).
The purpose of this vicious and unnecessary system is
made clear.
"Because the law worketh wrath" (Rom. 4:15).
"A wrathful man stirreth up strife" (Prov. 15:18).
"The wrath of man worketh not righteousness" (James
1:20).
Does that make clear the purpose of a multitude of vicious,
irritating laws?
It is admitted that each new criminal law creates a new
class of criminals, giving the opportunity to increase offices,
The Last Word 59
and reap a new crop of fines, penalties, and other sources of
profits.
That is sufficient to demonstrate that the law-making bod
ies are being guided and instructed by the Bible and the church.
We name that the worst form of collusion.
We shall now expose the evils, wilful false-pretenses,
contradictions, fraudulent misrepresentations, inconsistencies,
and crimes of the Bible.
It is practically impossible to reveal all. Practically every
important character in the Bible
is,
in some degree, evil-minded
or criminal.
God killed the two sons of Aaron for teaching
a
new
form of fire-worship (Num. 3:4).
God tried to kill Moses, in an ordinary tavern brawl (Ex.
4:24).
God said unto the Israelites:
"Thou shalt not go empty handed" (Ex. 3:21).
"But every woman shall borrow of her neighbor, and of
her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver and jewels
of gold, and raiment; and ye shall put them upon your sons,
and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians"
(Ex. 3:22).
These were clean-cut instructions in thievery, as taught
by God himself, in the very beginning.
This instruction was given prior to the alleged going out
into the wilderness of sin of the Israelites. Inasmuch as
it
has been demonstrated that no such people as the Israelites
ever existed in fact, and no such exodus ever occurred, this
is
a first lesson in thievery as taught by the Bible.
The purpose
is
made clear.
What benefit would gold, silver and rich clothing be to
poverty-stricken people going into
a
wilderness of confusion,
tribulations, and sin?
"To try them, to see whether they would obey the law
or not" (Deut. 8:2).
God said:
"Israel
is
my son, even my first born" (Ex. 4:22).
60 The Last Word
This not only convicts God of teaching crime to these
innocent people, but convicts him as a liar, for Israel is a name
he gave to Jacob, who made a bargain with him by which he
was to receive ten percent of all his graft. (Gen. 28:22).
And now we shall see why God, the father, taught his
own offspring to steal.
God ordered the Israelites to build him a tabernacle in
the wilderness, where a blade of green grass could not grow,
as demonstrated by an examination of the territory where all
this bunk was allegedly pulled off.
"And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold and make
their rings of gold, and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold"
(Ex. 26:29).
"And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple and scar
let, and fine trimmed linen of cunning work" (Ex. 26:31).
The word cunning means crafty, sly, deceit, designing;
rather a strange word to use in this connection.
"And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim-
wood overlaid with gold. Their hooks shall be of gold, upon
the four sockets of silver" (Ex. 26:32).
Do you now believe that God's instructions to the Israel
ites was on the square, and in the interest of morality?
Aaron took the gold away from the Israelites and made
a golden calf of
it,
so God could condemn
it
and confiscate
the gold (Ex. 32:24).
This period was the beginning of the union of the church
and civil government, against the producing masses.
Aaron means the teacher.
Moses, his brother, means a multitude of laws.
All this
is
to glorify the church.
Aaron had also confiscated the clothing which the people
had stolen from the Egyptians, before going into the wilder
ness (Ex. 32:25).
Moses, the sustaining law and authority, was the first
Christ. And God's servant.
He commanded the people
:
The Last Word 61
"Whosoever is of willing heart, let him bring gold and
silver, and brass to the Lord" (Ex. 35 :5).
"And blue, and purple, and scarlet and fine linen" (Ex.
33:6). All of which had been stolen at God's command.
"Golden chains on breast-plates."
"Gold rings."
"Sapphires, diamonds, topaz, carbuncles, onyx, jasper."
The "willing heart" gag is readily recognized as the mod
ern coercive—persuasion of church workers, and alleged char
ity organizations.
Now, do you understand God's purpose in teaching his
people to steal?
He wanted to hijack them in the wilderness.
First, the people are enriched by dishonest methods. Then
they are cast down, into a state of abject poverty, to coerce
them to surrender their wealth.
The people of the United States, today, would better
awaken from their lethargy, and demand a show-down. They
are now in the same wilderness of sin, poverty and crime,
and being coercively denuded of their wealth, and all their
personal property is being confiscated by an accursed system
of taxation, exactly as the original Ecclesia of ancient Athens
absorbed the property of its people.
There is purpose in what is being pulled off in the United
States today.
God fleeced the Israelites with the aid of his Christ —
Moses, the law, who was a cold-blooded murderer.
"And he looked this way, and that way, and when he saw
that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him
in the sand" (Ex. 2:12).
This was premeditated murder.
Then Moses fled to the protection of the high-priest of
Midian, meaning hiding behind strife and confusion.
Thus does the law conceal its own evil deeds by confus
ing judgments. Hence, Christ, although a murderer, as Moses,
is named a refuge (Isa. 25:4). A refuge is a place of safety
and protection.
62 The Last Word
God stablished six refuge cities (Num. 35:13).
These were refuge cities for the "manslayers to take
refuge in," and were typical of Christ, authority, who is ap
pointed as a refuge for sinners to "flee to and find safety."
This meant the church.
Today, the earth is covered with monasteries, convents,
and nunneries, which are the vilest places on earth, and which
are exempt from the intrusion of the law, in the United States,
notwithstanding they were suppressed in Europe, and their
properties confiscated.
Today, in the United States, the law does not intrude
upon catholic refuges.
Will some one explain this mystery?
The priests are not under the law.
We may now briefly go down the line of major Biblical
crimes, committed by the leading Biblical characters of God
and the church.
Abraham was willing to murder his own son at the sug
gestion of God, but found an easier way out of
it,
by burn
ing the ram in Abram to convert fire-worship into sun-worship.
Ab-ra-ham.
This has reference to the suppression of the traditional,
gnostic wisdom.
Isaac means light, intelligence, wisdom.
Abraham fornicated with his maid servant and she bore
him a bastard child. He was mean enough to turn both mother
and child out into the wilderness to starve (Gen. 16).
This
is
to smirch sun-worship which preceded christianity.
He denied his wife while traveling in Egypt" (Gen.
20:12).
"Abraham's nephew, Lot, while drunk, fornicated with
his two daughters who bore him bastard children" (Gen.
19:36).
Abraham's son, Isaac, was the father of Esau and Jacob.
Jacob was
a
liar and
a
thief, nevertheless, he
is
made the
church
of
Christ by God.
The Last Word 63
We here have two of the most important steps in the
christian exploitation revealed.
The thieving manner by which ecclesiasticism confiscated
and suppressed the gnostic system.
The beginning of the christian church as its concealing
cloak.
Esau, being the elder son, was the legitimate heir to all
that Isaac symbolized.
Is = light. A = the primal cause. Ac = the great sun.
The light of the great sun the primal cause.
Isaac means light, joy, prosperity, intelligence, and all
the enlightenment nature can give us.
Gnosticism, over ages of time, assembled all these into
wisdom, science, and philosophy.
God's temptation to Abraham to destroy his own son,
Isaac, by burning, reveals the original ecclesiastical intent to
destroy gnosticism by burning its accumulated wisdom, that
it might be the only source of learning and education.
Finding it could not wholly eradicate the teachings of
nature, it suppressed its high priest, gnosticism, to know, by
burning the ram in the name Ab-ram meaning high priest,
and converting his name into Ab-ra-ham, priest of the hot
sun. Sun-worship.
Ecclesiasticism was determined to seize light-worship, con
fiscate all knowledge and pose as the God-given power on
earth.
This necessitated the suppression of the living, traditional
gnosticism, and the casting down of humanity into a thousand
years of abject ignorance, that it might shine forth as the sole
dispensor of joy, prosperity, light, and knowledge, as formerly
symbolized by Isaac.
Isaac, old and blind, asked of his treacherous son, Jacob :
"Art thou my very son Esau? And Jacob said I am"
(Gen. 27:24).
Then this contemptible thief, with the assistance of his
equally dishonest mother, Rebekah, proceeded to rob Esau, and
all humanity, of the natural gifts of nature.
64 The Last Word
Ja = ever-existant ; cobus, usurpation by treachery. Same
as Akkub, meaning insidious.
Rebekah means snare, trap.
Esau means earthy producing mankind.
Now we may again convict the christian God of dis
honesty, and treachery toward struggling humanity. All this
contemptible deceit and trickery was pulled off with his secret
influence and collusion.
Did he punish Jacob for his criminal acts?
On the contrary, he made a bargain with him to make
him the guardian of the Ecclesia, and to pay to him ten per
cent of all his graft.
"Thy name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel"
(Gen. 32:28).
Is = the light — of Ra = the sun — is El = the first
cause of all. The light of the sun is the first cause of all.
Israel is the church of Christ.
Pharaoh was the sun-king of Egypt.
God instructed Moses, authority, the law, to say to Pha
raoh :
"Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son even my first
born" (Ex. 4:22).
God then whipped into line Moses, the law, and Aaron,
the teacher, intelligence, and they bowed their heads in sub
mission.
Israel, enlightenment, became the church of Christ. Light-
worship.
Christ is made a title of Jesus —Jesus Christ. This be
comes another evidence of treachery.
Je = ever-existent, sus = sustainer, supporter.
The name is the Greek form of Joshua.
Jo = increased — shua = wealth.
Increased wealth, savior of the Jews.
Jesus, therefore, symbolizes the supporting, producing
people.
Christ is the Greek Kristna, the Greek form of Messiah,
meaning anointed as a priest, or initiation in high office. The
The Last Word 65
character is Moses brought over from the old testament, in
disguise.
Mo = multitude of laws, ses is sus = to sustain, support.
Today, in the United States, one of the strongest evi
dences of connivance between church and government, is the
multitude of laws under which the people are being smothered.
If there is no such collusion, then there is a secret influ
ence, or political intrigue, directing the conduct of our law
making powers.
The same favoritism is shown, by God, toward the most
important characters in the Bible.
Speaking of David, Paul said :
"Of this man's seed hath God, according to his promise,
raised unto Israel a savior Jesus" (Acts. 13:23).
In the first verse of the new testament we have this:
"Abraham the father of Jesus Christ" (Matt. 1 :1).
This hooks up Israel as the church of Christ; therefore
the Christians of today are worshiping the thief, liar, and
usurper, Jacob, in this disguise, as well as worshiping Joshua
as Jesus.
David is another of God's beloved.
"Jesus Christ, the son of David" (Matt. 1:1).
"Christ is the son of David" (Mark 12:35).
"All Israel loved David" (1 Sam. 18:16).
"The Lord was with David" (1 Sam. 18:28).
David while walking on top of his house saw a woman
bathing and she was beautiful. He sent and had her brought
to him. He outraged her and she bore him a bastard child.
God destroyed the child and forgave David to save the face
of the church.
Then David killed Uriah the husband of Bathsheba and
took her as his concubine (2 Sam. 12:9).
"David danced before the Lord with all his might" (2
Sam. 6:14).
David's two sons were Absalom and Ammon.
Ammon enticed his sister Tamar to his room, outraged
66 The Last Word
her and kicked her out, for which act Absalom killed his
brother.
Tamar played the street harlot and enticed her blind
father-in-law to her house and fornicated with him.
God raised up a Savior for Israel, Ehud, a left-handed
man. He was sent to Eglon, the king of Moab, with a mes
sage from God.
Ehud made himself a two-edged dagger and concealed it
under his raiment.
He brought the present unto Eglon, and Eglon was a
very fat man, and when Ehud had made an end to offer the
present, he sent away the people that bore the present.
Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And
he arose out of his seat, and Ehud put forth his left hand,
and took the dagger from his right thigh and thrust it into
his belly, and the haft also went in after the blade. Then
Ehud went forth from the porch and shut the doors of the
parlor upon him and locked them.
This was a clean-cut, premeditated, godly murder.
Abner's stabbing of Asahel under the fifth rib, and mur
dering him, was another specimen of godly moral-suasion.
Here is another pretty one.
"When Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him
aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him
there under the fifth rib that he died" (2 Sam. 3:27).
This is a perfect lesson of the justification of retaliative
murder.
These are all premeditated murders and justified in the
sight of God.
Again we have evidence of secret connivance in crime for
church promotion and protection.
Ab = priest, ner = enlightenment.
Jo = increased, ab = priesthood.
The increased priesthood suppressed the high-priest of
intelligence.
Now we may see the play following these murders.
The Last Word 67
First an attempt is made to identify Jesus and Christ
as one.
"Son Jesus Christ our Lord, of the seed of David" (Rom.
1:3).
Solomon was the bastard son of David by Bathsheba,
the widow of Uriah whom David slew.
The secret code reveals this as another sly reference to
the confiscated gnosticism.
Uriah means light, intelligence, knowledge.
Bathsheba is Bathshua (1 Ch. 3:5).
The meaning of Bathshua is a measure of wealth. There
fore the suppression of knowledge was a measure to concen
trate the producing masses upon the production of wealth.
Solomon, God's alleged wise man, the most immoral char
acter in the Bible, having a thousand prostitutes.
Solomon's songs are the most vulgar things in the Bible,
having reference to sex-worship.
This is quite sufficient to prove that the origin of the
Christian religion and its church wreaks with evil and crime.
Why should struggling humanity be required to respect
and support this awful character named God, and his indo
lent priesthood, in ease and luxury?
"Neither doth God respect any person" (2 Sam. 14:14).
All these old testament characters are fabulous. Their
own code betrays them. That was why the Bible was forbid
den to common people for several centuries, until the church
was saddled upon them for support.
God — Aaron — Moses — Abraham — Isaac — Esau —
Jacob — Israel — David — Solomon — Joshua — Jesus
— Christ.
Not one of these characters ever existed in fact, as we
shall prove by their code:
God = the Sanskrit word good, worshipped by the Hindus.
"God is a spirit" (Jno. 4:24).
"God is light" (1 Jno. 1:5).
"Our God is a consuming fire" (Heb. 12:29).
"The Lord God is a sun" (Ps. 84:11).
68 The Last Word
Aaron = the teacher, enlightener.
A = the primal cause.
Ar -
fire.
On = the sun.
The fire of the sun is the primal cause of all.
He was the first Hebrew high priest, therefore was
the high priest of Fire-worship.
Moses = Mo, a multitude of laws.
Ses is sus, to support, sustain.
A multitude of laws to sustain the church.
Abraham = Father of the multitude. Sun-worship.
Ab = father, priest. Ra = the sun. Ham = hot.
The priest of the hot sun. Father of light.
Isaac — light, joy, prosperity.
Is = light.
A = the primal cause.
Ac -=• great.
Light the great primal cause. Light-worship.
Esau = hairy, finishing, producing, earthy mankind.
Jacob = supplanter, usurper by trickery.
Ja = ever-existent; cobus = treachery, insidious.
The usurper of intelligence, light and understanding.
Israel — Jacob in disguise. The church of Christ.
. Is = the light — of Ra = the sun, is El = the first
cause.
Fire-worship, Sun-worship, and Light-worship per
sonified into Man-worship.
David = carnal love. "Father of Jesus Christ" (Matt.
1:1).
David went to Paran — a place of caves (1 Sam.
25:1).
Jesus was born in a cave.
The caves of Paran were in the "Desert of Wandering"
and surrounded by:
On the north, Canaan = merchandising and trading.
On the south by the desert of Sinai — enmity and ambush.
The Last Word 69
On the west by Etham = the sea, the multitudes, pro
ducers.
On the east by Arabah = sedition, multiplying.
David was sent to Nabal. A fool, madness.
Nabal refused David food, and God sent Nabal's wife
Abigail, meaning joy, and David took her away, adding her
to his harem of several hundred other female joys.
"David arose from his couch and walked upon the top
of his house, and from the roof he saw a woman washing
herself ; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon" (2
Sam 11:2).
"David sent and took her, and he lay with her and she
returned unto her house" (2 Sam. 1 1 :4) .
This godly David simply outraged this woman to appease
his brutish desire.
She bore him a bastard child which God had killed, to
save the face of the church, but he did nothing to punish his
beloved David.
This is one of the most criminal pictures in the Bible and
was all done with God's connivance.
This woman was Bathsheba = daughter of God's people.
The wife of Uriah = light, same as. Urjah, meaning the
ever-existent fire — the sun. Uriah was descendant of Heth
= fear.
David took Uriah's wife and killed Uriah.
"Thou hast killed Uriah and hast taken his wife" (2
Sam. 12:9).
Let us now squeeze the juice out of this lemon.
Bathsheba became Bath-shua, meaning daughter of wealth,
and she bore unto David Solomon (1 Ch. 3:5).
Sheba means an oath.
Shua means wealth.
Solomon means recompense.
Sol = the soul.
O = the disc or eye, watchfulness.
M — the sea, the multitudes, producers.
On = the sun, light, enlightenment.
70 The Last Word
Now we may feel sure that compensation is the secret
intent in the distribution of wisdom.
It is wealth they seek, hence they change Sheba to Shua,
daughter of wealth.
We have another real joke to uncover.
This theme of wealth was from the very beginning.
See how the following fits into the scheme.
The first son of Noah is Shem = name, fame.
The first son of Shem is Elam.
Elam means a young priest, a virgin, and an epoch.
This is the first plain intimation of the "Immaculate Con
ception."
El means the primal cause.
Am means a female principle.
Mary is from Mer, Mere, the sea. Production begins in
the sea.
Sea means the producing multitudes.
Jesus is born of the virgin Mary.
Je = ever-existent. Sus = sustainer, supporter.
Therefore, Jesus means the producing people, the source
of wealth.
Jesus is the Greek form of Joshua.
Joshua means increased wealth, savior of the Jews.
In the concealed apocrypha is hidden the true story of
Mary. Apocrypha means hidden.
It tells us that Mary was raised in a convent, where she
was fed by a young priest.
At the age of twelve years she was found with child
and one Joseph was forced to marry her, notwithstanding he
was declared innocent of her condition. The conception was
charged to the Holy-ghost.
Now this is all a funny joke.
Jo = increasing. Seph means numbers, people.
The secret code reveals that the holy-ghost is the breath.
Therefore the story of the fabulous birth of Jesus is all
wind.
To protect their murderous scheme, it was essential to
The Last Word 71
submerge the producing masses, as represented by Jesus, in
a state to render them innocuous, therefore :
Mary means rebellion, tribulations, turbulent commotions.
She carries Jesus into Egypt.
Egypt means oppression, misery, afflictions. Jesus comes
out of oppression and goes into Galilee, meaning revolution,
and then goes into Capernaum, the hamlet of Nahum.
Nahum means the comforter, consolation. This means
the church.
Who do we find sitting at the church door? Levi, the
tax gatherer, disguised as Matthew, meaning giving gifts to
God.
We warn the people of the United States. This identical
scheme is being pulled off right now, and a showdown must
be made. Why are we being mulct to the limit by taxation?
Why are we being smothered beneath a multitude of laws?
Why has poverty placed millions in bread-lines? To bring
down those who have struggled to accumulate sufficient for
comfort and rest, to a level with the lowest masses.
Crime in every form has been commercialized.
Poverty is made an excuse for coercive charity.
And all attempts to guide the multitudes toward the
church, not as a matter of religion, but to support and give
power to that hateful thing back of the church, which names
the people, cattle, meaning capital.
There is not visible one motion which suggests the pro
motion of natural, normal, civilizing, national advancement
under the guidance of our constitution.
We are now struggling in the midst of that identical "wil
derness of sin," evil and poverty, described in the old testa
ment. This is the putting into actual practice of that horrible
test.
"And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord
thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble
thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart,
whether thou wouldst keep his commandments, or no.
72 The Last Word
"And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger"
(Deut. 8:2, 3).
Let us do a little speculative reasoning.
If the foregoing were actually true, the same God is
leading the church today, why then could he not apply this
same test to the people in the United States today?
Would our people willingly submit to such idiotic con
duct on the part of our government?
Then why are we submerged in the same identical con
ditions, with millions standing in line begging for a can of
manna, in the shape of beans?
The story in Deuteronomy is so manifestly a fake, no
attempt has ever been made to prove it true.
Leading Bible dictionaries and concordances make no
attempt to analyze the word Deu-ter-on-om-y.
Deu means the conversions. (Rain means doctrines.)
Ter = Terah, to breathe, the earth and atmosphere.
On = strength, light.
Om = the disc of the sun, and the sea.
Y = the three in one, the great unit.
If the Bible is true, there is every reason to believe the
church is now attempting to drag humanity in the same net,
by the same processes.
Moses was the alleged author of Deuteronomy.
Mo = a multitude of laws. Ses, Sus = to sustain.
"The law is our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ.
"But after faith is come we are no longer under a school
master" (Gal. 24:25).
"Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law"
(Gal. 3:13).
Now we may know why we are cursed by a multitude
of laws. All men must be legislated either into crime or into
the church.
If the old testament is a fake play, to be staged in the
new, then the Bible should be suppressed.
We have revealed quite sufficient to prove that the origin
of the christian church reeks with evil and crime, with the
The Last Word 73
connivance of the fabulous christian God, who is none other
than the head of the system.
Why should the world be required to respect this awful
character named God, and support his church?
"Neither does God respect any person" (2 Sam. 14:14).
All these characters are God's helpers. Many of them,
in disguise, are brought over into the new testament, to put
the big play in action as the christian religion.
Jehovah is God, the pope is named "God on earth."
Joshua is Jesus, increased wealth support.
Moses is Christ. Authority. A multitude of laws.
Jacob is brought over as James. Usurpation.
Israel is brought over as the church of Christ.
Miriam is brought over as Mary. Rebellion.
Levi, the tax collector, is Matthew. Giving gifts to God.
We know this revelation deeply chagrins those who ad
here to the church for the profits it yields, but we shall now
spread a poultice of funny things upon their wounded pride
to alleviate their righteous indignation.
This same poultice will be a feast of "manna" to those
who have a conscience and self-respect, and want to know
the truth.
We have previously identified God and Christ as symbols
of the gnostic creative waves. We shall now reveal the du
plicity and treachery concealed in the secret ecclesiastic code.
1. God = the word "good," worshipped by the Hindoos,
abbreviated. "The supreme, eternal, universal, creative
power."
2. "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living"
(Matt. 22:32).
3. "In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God and the word was God" (Jno. 1:1).
4. "The same was in the beginning with God" (Jno. 1 :2).
5. "God is with us" (Isa. 8:10). Therefore, the word
is with us. The code makes plain that this is all a puny at
tempt to adjust the ecclesiastic scheme to the gnostic system
of nature.
74 The Last Word
"The scripture is the word of God" (James 1:22).
"Jesus Christ the son of God, who is called the word be
cause he is the image of the invisible God, as our words are
images of our thoughts" (Jno. 1:1; Col. 1:15).
"God has revealed his will to us by Jesus Christ" (Jno.
3:34).
Now we have the truth —a clean-cut false-pretense.
Je = ever-existent. Sus =• sustenance, support.
Jesus is Joshua.
Jo = increased. Shua = wealth.
Christ is as Moses. A multitude of laws and authority.
Let us go deeper into this fake thing:
"All things were made by God; and without was not
anything made" (Jno. 1:3).
"In him was life, and the life was the light of men"
(Jno. 1:4).
"Surely God is in thee, and there is none other God.
There is no God" (Isa. 45:14).
Therefore, the God principle is expressed by the words
which we speak, which are the images of our own thoughts,
formed by our own mentation.
"God formed the earth to be inhabited" (Isa. 45:18).
"God is the God and savior of Israel" (Isa. 45:15).
Israel, in the old testament, is the worship of sun-light.
Is = the light — of Ra = the sun — is the El = first
cause of all.
Israel in the new testament is the church of Christ.
Church is from Chur = guardian of the sun.
Christ is derived from the same root as the cross.
Cross = Ak-ur-os, meaning the great fire, the sun.
Christ is the Greek Kristna, the Greek form of the He
brew Messiah, meaning anointed as priest, king, or to high
office.
"God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship
him in the spirit" (Jno. 4:24).
"No man hath seen God at any time" (1 Jno. 4:12).
"God spoke to Moses face to face" (Ex. 33:11).
The Last Word 75
"No one hath heard God's voice at any time nor seen his
shape" (Jno. 5:37).
"God spoke unto Moses, Abraham, Isaac and David."
This proves that these characters never existed as men.
"God judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgments
unto the son" (Jno. 5:22).
Jesus, the son, declared:
"I judge no man" (Jno. 8:15).
"My kingdom is not of this world" (Jno. 18:36).
"God sent Jesus
—I proceed forth from God" (Jno. 8:42).
"Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom
of God" (Jno. 3:3).
"Jesus comes from God, and returneth to God" (Jno.
13:3).
"Jesus said, now is the son of man glorified, and God
is glorified in him" (Jno. 13:31).
Here Jesus declares himself as the son of man, proving
beyond debate that both Jesus and Christ are personifications
of the oxygen wave in the gnostic system of creative waves.
This is why they are united in name.
The difference
is,
however, Christ
is
the positive wave
and Jesus
is
the negative wave, hence Jesus
is
the son of
man, the negative carbon wave.
"Jesus, through the father, gives life eternal" (Jno. 17:3).
As we have previously shown, the negative oxygen wave
is
absorbed by the negative nitrogen wave, which coils into
the orbital ring which symbolizes universal life.
This
is
all concealed gnosticism.
"The only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast
sent" (Jno. 17:3).
"God
is
Jehovah" (Isa. 12:2).
"I am God and not man" (Hos. 11 :9).
"There
is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things"
(1
Cor.
8:6). What kind of chatter
is
this?
"And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the son also himself be subject unto him that put all
76 The Last Word
things under him, that God may be all and in all" (1 Cor.
15:28).
This is another direct reference to the gnostic system.
"The Lord is God" (Ps. 18:31).
"The woman is of the man and the man of the woman"
(1 Cor. 11:12). We have previously explained this.
"God is one" (Gal. 3:20).
"Our God is a consuming fire" (Heb. 12:29). The sun.
"God is light and in him is no darkness" (1 Jno. 1
:5).
"God giveth to men, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy"
(Ecc. 2:26). This makes of God light.
"I am alpha and omega, the beginning and the end"
(Rev. 21 :6). Specifically gnostic, as we have shown.
Christ is called the son of man, in the Bible, about eighty
times. He is given about two hundred titles.
To add further impudence to the false pretense of palm
ing off on a gullible humanity of these fake characters as
actual beings, we find them listed in the "Emblems of the
Saints."
St. Aaron—censer, rod.
St. Abraham —sword near at hand.
St. Cherubim —Guard of Paradise. Hands lifted in ador
ation.
St. David—dove on his shoulder, holding harp.
St. Mary —the blessed virgin, carrying two fishes and a
loaf.
St. Moses —stabbed with a knife; holding tables of the
law.
St. Peter—two golden keys in hand.
St. Joseph —spouse of the blessed virgin; carrying a rod.
St. Noah—in ark with dove.
And endless other fake characters.
All references to God, coupled with Christ Jesus, man
and woman, are bound together with the gnostic system of
creative waves.
The Last Word 77
CHRIST
1. "The same as the messiah = initiation into high office.
2. "Equal to God, the father, and over all—authority, law.
3. "By Christ alone life and salvation are procured.
4. "The express image of God. Therefore God is au
thority.
5. "The brighness of his father's glory ; the glory of the
sun.
6. "The glory of all worlds and the refulgent luminary
of the universe. Bible concordance—sun-worship.
7. "Christ the son of the living God" (Matt. 16:16).
Light. This is a contradiction. Christ means authority of law.
8. "Christ died for the ungodly" (Rom. 5:6). This puts
Christ as Jesus.
9. "Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death" (Rom. 6:4).
10. "Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God"
(1 Cor. 1:24).
11. "God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy-ghost
which is given to us" (Rom. 5:6). The holy-ghost is our
breath. This identifies Christ as oxygen.
12. "Ye are Christs and Christ is God's" (1 Cor. 32:3).
This refers to the priesthood. In the confessional the priest
poses as Christ.
13. "Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law"
(Gal. 3:13). "The law is our school-master to bring us to
Christ" (Gal. 3:24).
14. "Jew, Greek, bond or free, male and female are all
one in Christ" (Gal. 3:28).
15. "God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ" (Eph.
1:3).
16. "Christ gives light" (Eph. 5:15). This intimates the
sun as Christ. Whereas, "Christ is our life" (Col. 3:4).
"Jesus declares, I am the light of the world" (Jno. 8:12).
17. "In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God" (Jno. 1:1).
78 The Last Word
18. "The same was in the beginning with God" (Jno.
1:2).
19. "All things were made by him" (Jno. 1 :3).
20. "In him was life, and the life was the light of all
men" (Jno. 1:4).
21. "No man hath seen God at any time, the only begot
ten son, which is in the bosom of the father, he hath declared
him" (Jno. 1:18).
Inasmuch as this alleged son is a myth, there is no evi
dence that a christian God exists.
But God himself declared in Exodus 4:22, that, "Israel
is my son, even my first born."
22. "Christ is our life" (Col. 3:4).
23. "Christ is all and in all" (Col. 3:11).
Such expressions, with the statement that God created all,
makes it plain that God created evil in the world.
24. "Jesus is wisdom" (1 Cor. 1:30).
Then why did God sacrifice wisdom?
This has reference to the suppression of the gnostic
wisdom.
25. "Jesus Christ is in you" (Gal. 13:5). When did you
come off the cross.
26. "The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ"
(Rom. 6:23). Then why worry?
27. "Christ is the son of David" (Mark 12:35; Luke
20:41).
28. "Jesus is the Christ" (Mark 8:29; Acts 17:3).
29. "Christ is the son of the living God" (Jno. 6:69).
This makes David the living God. Wait a moment !
30. "Jesus Christ the son of Abraham" (Matt. 1 :1).
Now, who is this over- fathered individual?
31. "The head of every man is Christ, the head of every
woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God" (1 Cor.
11 :3). Then, after all, God is not all, he is merely the head
of something.
32. "In Adam all die, in Christ all shall be made alive"
(1 Cor. 15:22).
The Last Word 79
It is clear, this contradictory tommyrot gives no light
whatever, and this is due to a desire to bind humanity in a
state of mystery and mental confusion, until ecclesiasticism
may acquire absolute control over all the governing powers
of the world, when humanity will be controlled by force.
For five hundred years the popes of Rome ruled Europe
by their so-called "temporal power." They appointed kings,
and controlled wars.
Now, that word temporal rises up to accuse them.
In 1870, when the catholic church felt secure in the
United States, and the political control of America, it sur
rendered the "temporal power," and, today, this conglomerate
mass of nationalities and tongues has become, in fact, the
Babylon of the Earth.
Babylon means, in the code, mixture and confusion.
Elsewhere we have commented on this well-designed trap
for ignorant humanity. Crime and poverty are commercialized.
Crime is coined out of a multitude of laws. "Where there
is no law there is no crime."
Poverty is the fruit of taxation.
The church lives, thrives and fattens on evil and poverty.
So-called charity is a business.
Were there no evil there would be no necessity for a
church.
We have shown the utter contempt for truth and reason
in their attempted exploitation of Christ. We shall now sub
mit Jesus, and attempt to unite the two, for examination.
Jesus is especially exploited in America through the se
cret catholic order of Jesuitry.
This suggests an analysis of this name America, which
stole the honors of discovery from Columbus.
Am means a female deity—the church of Christ.
Er = fire of the great era. Eros, a ship, also hero.
Ic = Iesous Christos.
A = the primal cause.
Erica is Latin for country.
This all has a significant suggestion of the newly discov
80 The Last Word
ered America as the future land for ecclesiastical exploitation.
1. Jesus
—"A savior; the god-man mediator."
2. The same with Joshua, "a type of Christ." Increased
wealth.
3. Ac—era—zy. Crazy.
Jesus was charged by his contemporaries with being
"crazy" and they said, he hath a devil and is mad.
Mythology relates that the goddess Hera = era struck
Dionysos "crazy," and that in this state he wandered through
the world teaching its inhabitants the elements of civilization
and the arts of cultivation.
4. "Jesus conceived in Mary by the holy-ghost" (Matt.
1
:20). The holy-ghost is the breath.
5. "Shall call his name Emmanuel, which, being inter
preted, is God with us" (Matt. 1:23).
Then why all the worry about God?
"No one hath seen God at any time," therefore, the cruci
fixion was a myth
6. "Thou shalt call his name Jesus" (Luke 1:31).
Je = ever-existent. Sus = supporter.
7. His name was called Jesus which was so named of the
angel before he was conceived in the womb" (Luke 2:31).
Angel means a priest.
A young priest attended Mary while she was in the con
vent, and at the age of twelve years she was found with child.
8. "Jesus being full of the holy-ghost returned from
Jordan, and was led by the spirit into the wilderness" (Luke
4:1).
Jordan means abundance.
Wilderness means the gentile nations ; place of wild beasts.
9. "Jesus thou son of God" (Matt. 8:29).
"God sent his only begotten son into the world" (1 Jno.
4:9).
"This Jesus whom I preach unto you is Christ." (Acts
17:3).
10. "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ" (Eph. 1:3).
The Last Word 81
11. "Jesus is light" (Jno. 1
:8).
12. "Christ gives light" (Eph. 5:15).
13. "God is light" (Jno. 1:5).
This clearly attempts to make Jesus and Christ as one,
which, by the creative waves, is impossible. This doubtless is
to cover the error of God having but one only begotten son.
14. "God reveals his will through Jesus" (Jno. 3:34).
God as symbolized by the gnostic nitrogen wave can have
no direct contact with Jesus, the carbon wave born out of the
virgin spiral.
Now, will some wise-cracker tell us who is running this
world ?
Who is God? Who is Christ? Who is Jesus?
The Bible gives two hundred different titles to Jesus
Christ.
When we sift it down, and measure it by the gnostic sci
ence, we find all of it refers to the double nature of man.
"There is a natural body and there is a spiritual body.
"The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last
Adam was made a quickening spirit" (1 Cor. 15:44, 45).
Jesus is the character and Christ is but a name.
"Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was
born Jesus, who is called Christ" (Matt. 1:16).
This explains the duality of Jesus Christ.
In the list of titles the following characters are listed as
Jesus Christs:
Adam.
David.
God.
Jacob.
Israel.
Judah.
Man.
Moses.
Solomon.
After having classified humanity, the question arose ; from
82 The Last Word
which class should be taken support and sustenance for the
church ?
Jesus symbolizes the earthy producing masses.
Je — ever-existent. Sus = sustainer, supporter.
Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea.
Bethlehem means the house of bread.
Judaea means confession and praise (Acts. 5 :31).
Immediately after this selection, Jesus was carried into
Egypt by Joseph and Mary.
Egypt means oppression, trouble, misery.
Jo = increased. Seph = numbers. Mary means rebellion.
15. "Thou art Christ, son of the living God" (Matt.
16:16).
16. "Jesus Christ, the son of David" (Matt. 1:1).
17. "Jesus Christ, the son of Abraham" (Matt. 1 :1).
18. "Jesus, the son of Man" (Luke 19:10).
19. "The son quickeneth whom he will" (Jno. 5:21).
Quicken means to awaken, enlighten.
This proves, in the very beginning, that favoritism was
to prevail in education and enlightenment.
The Bible is filled with endless contradictions.
Jesus is named the prince of peace (Isa. 9:6).
20. "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth.
I came not to send peace but a sword.
"For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-
in-law against her mother-in-law.
"And a man's foes shall be they of his own household"
(Matt. 10).
"He that loveth father or mother more than me is not
worthy of me; and he that loveth son and daughter more
than me is not worthy of me" (Matt. 10:37).
This is the priest speaking.
In the confessional the priest poses as Jesus Christ.
Could more egotistical, selfish and contemptible words be
uttered by God or man than this vulgar declaration that this
The Last Word 83
fake character was sent by God to teach men to violate the
most sacred duties of nature and mankind?
This is wholly in keeping with the vicious pamphlet issued
by a catholic archbishop, in which he declared that every child
born of a mother not of the catholic church is a bastard, and
the mother a prostitute.
The same treasonable pamphlet declares the church in
dependent of and superior to the civil government of the
United States.
Yet, this government permitted this pamphlet to pass
freely through the mails without challenge, to insult decent,
self-respecting citizens.
21. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and
that the spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (1 Cor. 3:16).
22. "There is none good but one, that is God" (Matt.
19:17).
23. "God is light" (1 Jno. 1:5).
24. "No man hath seen God at any time" (1 Jno. 4:12).
25. Jacob declared : "I have seen God face to face" (Gen.
32:30). But we know Jacob lied to his father.
26. Jesus said: "Ye are Gods" (Jno. 10:34). To see
Good, look at yourself in the mirror.
27. "God is one" (Gal. 3:20). Above, Jesus speaks in
the plural.
28. "Our God is a consuming fire" (Heb. 12:29; Deu.
4:24).
29. "The Lord God is a sun and shield" (Ps. 84:11).
30. "The Lord thy God is a jealous God" (Deut. 4:24).
31. "Jesus is a Jewish Rabbi" (Jno. 3:2).
Of course, because he is Joshua in disguise.
32. "God cannot be tempted, neither tempteth he any
man" (Jas. 1:13).
"God did tempt Abraham" (Gen. 22:1).
Therefore, Abraham is not a man.
Now, in view of all this ludicrous stuff, why give cred
ence to anything found in the Bible?
When this idiotic blather is analyzed under the gnostic
84 The Last Word
microscope, concealed in the secret ecclesiastical code, quite
a different interpretation of names, and their purpose, is
revealed.
Not one of these characters, God, Jesus and Christ, ever
existed as living beings. They merely impersonate certain
powers, essential for the promotion of an imperialistic human
enterprise, a usurpative political intrigue.
Through inspired ignorance, superstitions —fear has re
moved from the unthinking masses all sense of self-protec
tion, and placed them at the mercy of coercive-suasion which
both leads them astray, and fleeces them. In the code the
producing masses are classed as cattle and cattle mean capital.
Producing humanity is the capital of ecclesiasticism and
its fake church. Civil government is now the Christ to exer
cise his authority to smother the nation in a blanket of crim
inal laws, and impoverish the people by endless taxation.
The iron fists of common sense and reason should be
smashed into the faces of the human skunks responsible for
this, and the cringing hounds who live, thrive and fatten off it.
The first ten words in the Bible reveal the secret intent
and purpose of ecclesiasticism. There is not one breath of
true religion in the thing. The church is merely a cover.
"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth"
(Gen. 1:1).
Nothing in the Bible betrays cleaner-cut false-pretense
than this first utterance. In the original gnostic manuscripts,
the words God and heaven are in the plural — Gods and
heavens, signifying the leaders, and chiefs, organized tribes,
and nations of people. In the singular, as used in this verse,
the code reveals:
God as a supreme being.
Heaven as the ecclesiastical government.
Earth as producing mankind.
We shall now mention a few of the contradictions and
inconsistencies found in the Bible, which reveal themselves
when we read the book in the light of the code.
The Last Word 85
"In the same day God shall shave with a borrowed razor"
(Isa. 7:20).
Now what kind of fool stuff is this?
"God is a spirit."
Why! You crazy bat, this was to put into the human
mentation the invention of safety-razors.
God declares:
"I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts. I delight not in the blood of bullocks, lambs
and goats" (Isa. 1:11).
Yet, when he had tempted Abraham to sacrifice his son
Isaac, he found a stray ram to take his place.
The firstlings of every flock were roasted upon the altar
for God.
"And God smelled a sweet savour of burning flesh" (Gen.
8:21).
Has a spirit a nose and a sense of smell? Does this not
sound like the ravings of a drunken, fat-bellied priest?
"Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt
not partake of
it,
for the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die" (Gen. 11:17).
The wise serpent of gnosticism said to Eve:
"God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof ye shall
not surely die, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
gods" (Gen.
3
:5).
This fruit was knowledge.
The gods were priests.
They did partake and they did not die.
Thus God was made
a
wilful liar.
Moreover, God had previously said:
"Every tree bearing fruit
I
give to you for food" (Gen.
1:29).
The evidence that God was
a
meat eater
is
shown by
his having turned down the vegetable offerings of Cain for
the sheep offering of Abel (Gen. 4:5).
Cain in the code means vegetation.
Abel means breath, the respiratory animals.
86 The Last Word
Ab = the high-priest. El = the first cause —the breath.
How does it occur that God was so modest that he tried
to cover Adam and Eve with "fig-leaves," and later, turned
tailor and made them "coats of skins," and did not do so for
other animals? Instead, he sacrificed a part of his crea
tions to favor others (Gen. 3:21).
"Let us go down and there confound their language"
(Gen. 11:7).
"Us" again. How many gods were there in the gang?
IMAGES
"Thou shalt make two cherubims of gold" (Ex. 25:18).
"Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any
likeness of anything" (Ex. 20:4).
The christian church could not exist without the worship
of an imaginary Mary with a fat baby in her lap, Jesus on
the cross, and many pagan images. Not overlooking the little
wooden Jesus in Rome, the 5. Bambino, the most profitable
image in the world to the catholic church, and having a half
million of jewels hanging upon its body—blessed and crowned
by the pope.
"And there went up Moses, and Aaron, and Nadab,
Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and they saw
God, and they did eat and drink" (Ex. 24:9, 10).
"No man hath seen God at any time" (1 Jno. 4:12).
Does this not declare these characters to be myths?
This was merely a party of rollicking priests, a bunch
of fat-bellied priests, having a bat with the pope, "God on
earth."
In modern times these are called councils, conclaves,
conferences.
"Whosoever doeth any work on the sabbath day he shall
surely be put to death" (Ex. 31 :15).
Untold millions have paid no attention to this murderous
threat, therefore the human slaughter-house had to be closed
The Last Word 87
—be careful, the United States government has taken to kill
ing "cattle."
"God said to Moses : Write thou these words" (Ex. 34 :27).
"God wrote on the tablets" (Deut. 10:4).
"Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitation upon
the sabbath day" (Ex. 35:3).
How many catholics obey this fool command, with the
mercury at zero? Merely a sop for catholic doctors and hos
pitals and graveyards. There is a profit in every motion. But
this graft does not stop at the grave. Purgatory must be sup
ported.
We do not hesitate to declare that every cent gathered
in by this false-pretense is a clean-cut theft. It is merely a
church invention.
"Ye shall eat no manner of fat of ox, sheep or goat"
(Lev. 7:23). Why?
Because the fat is the best. Rich, fruitful, prosperous,
cheerful.
One cannot have respect for the teachings of the Bible
with such nonsensical contradictions everywhere, proving self
ish motives.
"And Abel, he also brought the firstlings of his flock
and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel
and his offering" (Gen. 4:4).
"All the fat is the Lord's" (Lev. 3:16).
If fat is so objectionable, why raise up a lot of lazy,
pig-jowled, fat-bellied priests to hog all the fat things?
The choice parts of all animals were always brought to
the altar to feed the faces of fat priests posing as gods on
earth.
The hare and the swine, their flesh shall ye not eat" (Lev).
Is that the reason why the United States government has
killed and destroyed millions of hogs?
"And all the meat offering that is baked in the oven,
and all that is dressed in the frying pan, shall be the priests
that offereth it" (Lev. 7:9).
Can you beat that for a skin-game?
88 The Last Word
The idiotic fools bring to the Lord their choicest offerings ;
the priest goes through his hocus-pocus, then sneaks into se
clusion and has a hearty meal.
The priest even confiscated the skin of the animal offered
(Lev. 7:8).
"Do ye not know that they which minister about holy
things live of the things of the temple? And they that wait
at the altar are partakers with the altar?" (1 Cor. 9:13).
What would the Chicago stock market do, or what would
the farmers do if hogs were wholly suppressed?
Now, here no doubt, is the origin of bank moratoriums,
such as recently locked up all the normal money used for
business exchanges, and skinned thousands of people out of
interest due them by legitimate agreements with the banks.
Nothing can ever explain or justify this awful act.
"At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a
release.
"And this is the manner of release : Every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbor shall release it; he shall not
exact of his neighbor, or of his brother, because it is called
the Lord's release" (Deut. 15:1,2).
On its face this is a fraudulent procedure.
It is most peculiar that, during the same period our gov
ernment was enforcing its mysterious moratorium, closing all
the banks, notwithstanding there were millions of hungry peo
ple standing in bread and bean lines, it was destroying millions
of cattle, sheep and hogs, not even permitting the people to
use the fresh meat off the carcasses.
"All fowls that creep upon all four shall be an abomina
tion unto you" (Lev. 11:20).
Now what kind of a bird was this?
"Thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed" (Lev.
29:19).
That sends about every modern farmer to hell.
"Neither shall a garment of mingled linen and wool come
upon thee" (Lev. 19:19).
God surely was sticking his nose into the private, per
The Last Word 89
sonal affairs of the people ; but not much more than the gov
ernment is doing today.
"Ye shall not round the corners of your heads" (Lev.
19:27).
God is a practical joker to thus remind mankind that he
is a square, wooden-headed thing.
This is not only disgusting, it is also funny.
"If a man take his brother's wife, they shall be childless"
(Lev. 20:21).
What rot!
"If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and
have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without
unto a stranger; her husband's brother shall go in unto her,
and take her to him to wife" (Deut. 25:5).
Now which is true ?
Num. 21 :31-33 is too absurd to put in print.
. "The Lord said unto Moses, make thee a firey-serpent,
and set it upon a pole and every one that is bitten, when he
looketh upon it shall live" (Num. 21:8).
Suppose this pole was in New Jersey, and a man was
bitten in California?
Huh! If God was all powerful, why did he not destroy
all serpents and protect all men alike?
Such rot is disgusting, not funny.
"The Lord's anger was kindled and he sware" (Num.
32:10).
"Thou shalt not swear."
This proves this alleged God is human. He does all the
things men are tempted to do.
"The Lord your God proveth you to know whether ye
love the Lord" (Deut. 13:3).
This is coercive affection, that is the secret theory of
love for the law. Coercion always begets secret contempt
and hatred.
Who could love or respect a fabulous freak?
How could anybody respect a thing like this, allegedly
90 The Last Word
all and in all, and controls all, yet is eternally accusing
mankind of disobedience?
No one has ever seen him or heard his voice.
"Thou shalt not eat of them that chew the cud" (Deu.
24:7).
Is this why the United States government is killing mil
lions of cattle?
What is to become of our stock-yards, our canneries, our
butchers? What about the fatted calves of the Bible?
"Of all that are in the waters; all that have fins and
scales shall ye eat, and whatsoever hath not fins and scales
ye shall not eat" (Deut. 14:9, 10).
Goodbye catfish, eels, and good old turtle soup; and oys
ters, clams, lobsters and others things.
Doesn't that wake you up?
If that was consistent then, why not now?
"Thou shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself, thou
shalt give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he
may eat
it,
or thou mayest sell
it
unto an alien" (Deut. 14:21).
This
is
identical with the teaching of thievery to the
Israelites —clean-cut teaching of crime.
Can you have any respect for so contemptible
a
God?
Does
it
not prove that the Biblical God
is
a fabulous fake?
If, after you have had these revelations placed before
you, you continue to help support the church, and pretend
a
belief in its fabulous characters, you are either
a
dummy,
with no mind of your own, or else you are reaping
a
material
benefit by your false-pretense of religious belief.
"The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto
a
man, neither shall
a
man put on
a
woman's garment" (Deut.
22:5).
This condemns untold thousands of young women wear
ing men's clothing.
Deut. 21 :18-21
is
a murderous commandment:
"He that
is
hanged
is
accursed of God" (Deut. 21 :23).
How about Jesus, son of God, hanged upon the cross
?
"When
a
man hath taken
a
wife, he shall not go out to
The Last Word 91
war, neither shall he be charged with any business, but he
shall be free at home for one year, and shall cheer up his
wife which he hath taken" (Deut. 24:5).
Ha! Ha! What folly. Poor girls, most of them need
cheering up later. But this implies war as a necessity.
Here is an example for murderously inclined persons:
"Then Jael took a nail of the tent, and a hammer, and
went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temple, and
fastened it into the ground, for he was asleep and weary"
(Judges 4:21).
No ordinary, conscientious, human being would sanction
such a treacherous murder.
"God is not a man that he should lie, nor the son of man
that he should repent" (Num. 23:19).
"God said, it repenteth me that I have set up Saul to
be king. The Lord repented that he had made Saul king over
Israel" (Sam. 11:35).
"And it repented the Lord that he had made man on
the earth" (Gen. 6:6).
These contradictions are contemptible, because they are
so human, and associated with a fake godly piety.
"The Lord drove out the inhabitants of the mountains
but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because
they had chariots of iron" (Judges 1:19).
Ah! The invention of iron chariots by men put an end
to godly raids, taking from him his all-powerful character,
proving he was but a man after all.
"An evil spirit from the Lord troubled him" (Sam. 16:
14-23).
So evil was a part of God's armament.
"Wickedness proceeded from the wicked" (Sam. 24:13).
It is evident that, if God sends forth evil spirits he him
self is evil.
Samuel makes clear that this holy book teaches a belief
in ghosts, witches, spirits, wizards and hobgoblins, as a part
of divine revelation.
92 The Last Word
"And David danced before God with all his might" (2
Sam. 6:14). Isn't that funny?
He danced naked before his female servants and his wife
left him.
These things are too disgusting to notice.
Was God displeased with the vulgar things David was
doing ?
"Go tell my servant David, saith God, thou shalt build
me an house for me to dwell in" (2 Sam. 6:5).
Now wouldn't that shock you? God owning all had to
ask a human being to build him a house in which to live?
Where? And he a spirit.
"Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took
hold of
it,
for the oxen shook
it,
and God smote him and he
died"
(2
Sam. 6:6, 7).
You crazy fools, who are closing your eyes against truth
and justice, will you see no injustice in such an act?
"Solomon loved the Lord. God said to him, there was
none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise
like unto thee"
(1
Kings 3:3-12).
One man, of all the billions of humanity, selected to be
superior to all others, notwithstanding he
is
the most vulgar
character in the Bible.
Even so, God repented having made Solomon head of
Israel.
God said: "I will be
a
lying spirit in the mouth of all
prophets"
(1
Kings 22:22). What next?
Who can respect such
a
God?
"His anger endureth but a moment" (Ps. 30:5).
"The Lord's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made
them wander into the wilderness forty years" (Num. 32:13).
Compare these two periods and try to get the truth.
What was the purpose of this fabulous wandering?
"And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord
thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble
thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart,
whether thou wouldest keep his commandments or no.
The Last Word 93
"And he humbled thee and suffered thee to hunger"
(Deu. 8:2, 3),
This is one of the most contemptible things in the whole
Bible. It is but a picture of what was to be a fact later.
This modern wilderness is right here in the United States,
today, and the people are being tried, and tested beyond en
durance. Ignorance, poverty, and crime are commercialized,
to impoverish and incriminate the nation to vindicate the
church, and the legislative powers.
"The days of our years are three score and ten" (Ps.
90:10).
"His days shall be a hundred and twenty years" (Gen.
6:3). Why this favoritism ?
Here is a bit of truth which appeals to common sense.
"That which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts,
as one dieth so dieth the other, yea, they have all one breath;
man hath no pre-eminence above a beast, all go unto one place,
all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.
"Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and
the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?"
(Eccl. 3:19-22).
They dare not teach this gnostic truth from pulpit; to
do so would destroy God, heaven, hell, devils and angels, and
the churches would no longer be able to fleece their flocks,
and live off the fat of the land.
"The living know they must die, but the dead know not
anything, neither have they any more reward, for the mem
ory of them is forgotten" (Ecc. 9:4-6).
Thus the Bible tells us that the immortal life it promises,
as a bribe, is a fake and a false-pretense.
God himself grows impatient at the foolishness of the
church.
"Your new moons, and your appointed feasts my soul
hateth ; they are a trouble unto me. I am weary to bear
them" (Isa. 1:14).
What a farce that an almighty power could become weary
of the false-pretenses of the church of its own creation.
94 The Last Word
This is a repetition, yet it is worth while.
"In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that
is hired" (Isa. 6:20).
Well ! Well ! God, a spirit, with whiskers, shaving him
self, and with a borrowed razor! With the earth covered with
competent barbers.
Draw your own conclusion.
"The moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed"
(Isa. 24:23).
This is an astounding confession.
In the code the moon is the church, and the sun is civil
government.
Are these normal things of nature to blush for shame
at some trivial thing?
Well! they should, just now.
"The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be seven fold as the light of
seven days" (Isa. 30:26).
Such folly should condemn and suppress the whole Bible,
but this chatter means more than appears on its face ; it means
that the church will assume the powers of super-government.
"The ends of the earth were afraid, drew near and came"
(Isa. 41:5).
When that was first written they did not know the earth
was a globe.
"I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these
things" (Isa. 45:7).
"God saw everything that he had made and it was very
good" (Gen. 52:14). Thus evil is declared good.
What started him in the business of making evil?
"I will dash them one against another, even the fathers
and sons together, saith the Lord, I will not pity nor spare,
nor have mercy" (Jer. 13:14).
Would a true God of "Mercy, love, charity, forebear-
ance, and long suffering" be guilty of this criminal act?
No, it is a hound priest giving vent to his hatred for
the common herd.
The Last Word 95
"I am weary with repenting" (Jer. 15:6).
"God is not the son of man that he should repent" (Num.
23:19).
"The Lord is not weary" (Isa. 40:28).
"I will fan them with a fan" (Jer. 15 :7).
Wouldn't that be funny? God sitting there with a great
big fan, fanning the people. Hollywood surely missed some
thing.
The following should awaken the United States :
"Mine anger which shall burn forever" (Jer. 17:4).
"If they will not obey, I will utterly destroy that nation"
(Jer. 22:17).
"If that nation against whom I have pronounced will turn
from their evil, / will repent of the evil I thought to do unto
them ; if it do evil I will repent of the good wherewith I
said I would benefit them" (jer. 18:8-10).
Both bribery and blackmail are involved in the verse.
Has the all-powered God no other means of making his own
creations normal?
To thus threaten repentance on his part, God must have
changed his mind about not being the son of man that he
should repent.
This is too much like Bible prophecy. If it happens, it
is true; if it doesn't happen, it is not true prophecy, "And the
prophet must surely die."
"I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the
flesh of their daughters" (Jer. 19:9).
What kind of cannibalistic brute is this God?
He teaches the people to eat of the flesh and blood of
"his only begotten son," then compels human beings to eat
each other.
"O Lord, thou hast deceived me; thou hast prevailed"
(Jer. 20:7).
Is there no coercion revealed here?
"If ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself that
this house shall become a desolation" (Jer. 22:5).
"Thou shalt not swear."
96 The Last Word
"Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in vain."
Think of God standing around cussin' and swearing about
some trivial thing. Suppose some poor devil was deaf.
"The Lord shall roar from on high, he shall mightily
roar upon his habitation. He shall give a shout" (Jer. 25:30).
Tumble! Tumble! An invisible spirit roaring and
shouting! Such an experience would make one feel they
were attending a Negro camp-meeting.
They could have given some dignity to God's rampage
by adding "prancing and snorting."
"If the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken, I, the
Lord, have deceived that prophet" (Ez. 14:9).
Isn't that shocking? God confessing that he must lie to his
prophets that they may deceive trusting humanity for the
benefit of the church?
That is not all of this treacherous thing.
"—and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and I will
destroy him from the midst of the people Israel" (Ez. 14:9).
If that is not clean-cut treachery, betrayal, and murder,
name it.
Now contemplate the following:
"God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy-prophets
since the world began" (Acts 3:21).
He has, above, confessed that he places lies in their
mouths.
"And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will
not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
people" (Acts 3:23).
"The prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in
my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that
shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall
die" (Deu. 18:20).
"When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if
the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which
the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously; thou shalt not be afraid of him" (Deut.
18:22).
The Last Word 97
Now, isn't that a sure-thing game?
Enforced prophecy is the big game.
The story of the virgin Mary and the birth of Jesus, is
such an enforcement, and is the rankest fraud in fhe whole
Bible.
"Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet" (Matt. 1
:22).
To learn that Ezekiel.is a false prophet read the follow
ing jokes :
"The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father" (Ez.
18:20).
"I will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation" (Ez. 20:5).
Isn't that a clean reversal?
"I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments
whereby they should not live" (Ez. 20:25).
Isn't that truly a godly act ?
"With fury poured out I will rule over you" (Ez. 20:33).
And "God is love."
One more fake:
"God comes from teman" (Hab. 3:3).
A whole story might be written about this.
Teman means the southern desert.
He is the eldest son of
Elephaz, meaning God his strength.
Grandson of Esau, the red earth.
This is suggestive. In the Libyan desert west of Egypt
were the caves of Nitrea, in which, it is alleged, the monks
first conceived the idea of the christian religion.
Teman is cognate with Temenos, meaning an enclosed
circle.
Like the suppression of gnosticism, it was essential for
the ecclesiastical enterprise to absorb these moth-eaten monks,
with their fabulous scriptures.
Let us continue our Biblical stuff.
"Resist not evil" (Matt. 5:39).
What kind of a come-on is this?
98 The Last Word
"If a man sue thee at the law and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also" (Matt. 5:40).
And why not his pants so he would get pinched when
he left the court-room?
"Whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain" (Matt. 5:41).
Ha ! Ha ! Why not take my dear old sponsor, Mark
Twain, as a pilot—he is now out of an earthly job?
On this idiotic principle where would a man stop?
"Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would
borrow of thee turn not away" (Matt. 5:42).
Suppose one should bump into a modern bread-line?
This demonstrates that there is no intention on the part
of the church to eliminate poverty and human distress.
"Love your enemies; bless them that curse you" (Matt.
5:44).
Why does God not practice what he preaches ?
"When thou prayest, enter into thy closet" (Matt. 6:6).
Why do not the christian churches practice this?
Why do the blaa-blaa priests and preachers pray in public?
"Take no thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, or what ye shall put on" (Matt. 6:25).
Do the sleek, fat-bellied priests practice this?
Have the millions in bread- and bean-lines any choice of
foods or clothing?
"Himself took our infirmities, and bore our sickness"
(Matt. 8:17). But we had to pay the doctor, just the same.
Why, then, are thousands of hospitals filled with sick
people, scattered over the world?
"Let the dead bury the dead" (Matt. 8:22).
Wouldn't that be funny, to see dead men putting another
dead one in hell?
Hell means the grave.
"Whosoever speaketh against the holy-ghost, it shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come" (Matt. 12:32).
The Last Word 99
This is a hot one. In the secret code the holy-ghost means
the breath, respiration.
Evidently the writer of that had never experienced a
Kansas dust-storm.
At no place or time has "the world to come" been identi
fied.
"While yet he talked to the people, behold his mother
and his brethren stood without desiring to speak with him.
He said unto him that told him: Who is my mother? Who
are my brethren?
"And he stretched forth his hands towards his disciples
and said: Behold my mother and my brethren" (Matt. 12:
46-49).
This is absolute proof of the mean false-pretense of it all.
Jesus who is accused of thus denying his own mother,
never existed as a living being. He is the Greek form of
Joshua, meaning increased wealth, the savior of the Jews.
Mary, his alleged mother, means rebellion, and is Miriam,
the alleged sister of Moses and Aaron.
Their own secret code specifically reveals this rank fraud,
which
is,
today, preached as literal truth, to multitudes of
human dummies, too ignorant to understand it.
Here
is
another evidence verifying the preceding:
"Why speaketh thou unto them in parables? He answer
ed
:
Because
it
is
given unto you to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven, but to them
it
is
not given" (Matt.
13:11).
He was speaking to his followers, when he made this con
fession
:
Heaven means ecclesiastical government.
"If thou wilt be perfect, sell all that thou hast and give
to the poor" (Matt. 19:21).
That
is,
impoverish oneself to enrich the church.
In Matt. 19:17
it
says: "There
is
none good but one, and
that
is
God."
The name God
is
an abbreviation of the Sanskrit word
good.
100 The Last Word
Then why make oneself a pauper for the benefit of others
if no personal benefits come from it? If we sell what we
have, and give the proceeds away, we merely join the ranks
of beggary, while some one else enjoys our property.
This "giving to the poor" is one of the greatest sources
of income to the church.
So-called charity is one of the greatest frauds permitted
to thrive by government protection. About sixty-five per cent
of all collections are absorbed by the collecting bodies.
It is amazing to what extent mankind has been led into
imbecile beliefs.
They should study Matt. 13:11, then extend this study
to verse 14 of the same chapter, to learn the purpose of it.
"And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which
saith, By hearing ye shall hear and not understand ; and seeing
ye shall see and shall not perceive" (Matt. 13:14).
Esaias is Isaiah brought over.
Isaiah means the salvation or deliverance of John, mean
ing giving gifts to God.
This binds the ignorant masses to enforced fake proph
ecy, an insult which should be rudely resented.
The true purpose of binding the people in ignorance is
told in Mark.
"That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hear
ing they may hear and not understand ; lest at any time they
should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them"
(Mark 4:12).
Now, which is
it,
to fulfill fake prophecy, or to bind the
people in ignorance and sin, or both?
This confession
is
criminal on its face.
Sin and evil are commercialized by the church.
It
is
a
self-evident truth,
if
there were no evil in the world there
would be no reason for supporting
a
ravenous church.
Here
is
something to make the "brain trust," and the
new deal thing, and the N. R. A.'s, and the B.
I.
G.'s and
numerous other wow-wows sit up and take notice.
"These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast
The Last Word 101
made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and
heat of the day. But he answered and said, Friend, I did
thee no wrong; didst thou not agree with me for a penny?"
(Matt. 20:12, 13).
Is the disgraceful pretense of correcting our inspired
state of national depression paying attention to this right to
bargain ?
Jesus wanted to ride, although he had always told his
disciples to walk.
So, they stole an ass and a colt for him.
"And they brought the ass and colt, and put on them their
clothes and they sat him thereon" (Matt. 21:7).
This must have been an act in a circus if he rode both
the animals at the same time.
Could they pull off this thing today, on the plea that it
was for Jesus?
"Man born like a wild ass's colt" (Job 11 :12).
This Jesus character was a savage, if half of what is said
about him may be believed.
Read Matt. 21 :12-19.
"All the devils besought him, saying, send us into the
swine, and Jesus gave them leave" (Mark 5:12, 13).
-It is quite definitely established that there were no swine
at all kept in that country at that time.
We are again confronted by a curious coincidence. Why
did Jesus not send the devils into the sea and spare the hogs
for food? Could these devils talk. We wonder what lan
guage they spoke. How many devils were running about,
loose.
It is more important to ask: Why has our own Federal
government been killing hundreds of thousands of hogs and
cattle, burning their carcasses, or casting them into rivers while
23,000,000 starving people waited in the bread and soup lines
for a morsel of food?
Did they put a devil into each animal slaughtered?
It came directly under our observation, that several thou
sand head of cattle had been thus slaughtered, on a single
102 The Last Word
occasion, and when the poor, hungry people attempted to take
and use the fresh meat, they were threatened with arrest and
prosecution.
This horrible thing will surely have an equally horrible
reaction in due time.
Let us continue the funny stuff.
"Commanded that they should take nothing for their
journey save a staff only, but be shod with sandals" (Mark
6:8,9).
Would we tolerate, today, prowling men with only a stick
and slippers?
In Matt. 10:10, they are forbidden to take even staffs
and shoes. Now which story is right?
In like manner Matthew and Mark again differ.
Matt. 27:34 says they gave to Jesus to drink vinegar
mingled with gall.
Mark 15:23 says they gave him wine mingled with myrrh.
In the code gall means sin. Wine means consolation.
Nevertheless :
"He that believeth not shall be damned" (Mark 16:16).
Now, who can escape being damned, with all these con
tradictions set before him? Coercion by threats is a mean but
potent weapon of the church.
Threats of "hell," and of "eternal damnation" are heard
in practically every sermon. Hell means the grave.
"And Jesus increased in wisdom" (Luke 2:52) and he
"one with the father" and "equal with God."
Does not that disgust you?
Perhaps he was going to a parochial school, or maybe a
Jesuit college.
"Being forty days tempted of the devil and in those days
he did eat nothing, and when they were ended he was after
ward hungered" (Luke 4:2).
Which one of the endless devils tempted him?
If he were equal with God, he needed no food. If he
were a mere man, he would have hungered, in fact starved.
The following is simple-minded by their own code :
The Last Word 103
"And the devil taking him up into a high mountain,
showed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment
of time" (Luke 4:5).
Not even the sun could have accomplished such a vision ;
but the code will clear this up.
Devil means a slanderer, an adversary.
Mountain means:
"Place of power and authority" (Amos 4:1).
"Kingdoms" (Isa. 2:1).
"The visible Church" (Isa. 2:1,2).
"Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
more than ninety and nine just persons which need no re
pentance" (Luke 15:7).
In simple, one stray dog, filled with the corruption and
diseases of mingling with other curs, if he returns home is
worth ninety-nine dogs which have remained at home and
conducted themselves properly.
This is contemptible. It sets a premium on sin. If God
cannot prevent sin, he certainly cannot know, positively, that
a man's repentance is honest and sincere.
It is perfectly safe to estimate there are ninety-nine hypo-
crits in the church following to one who is ignorant enough
to be sincere.
If all this is true gospel, then the Bible should be rudely
suppressed for teaching it.
Heaven means ecclesiastical government.
"He that hath no sword let him sell his garment and buy
one" (Luke 22:36).
Huh ! Go naked to carry a sword.
On the contrary, Matthew says :
"All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword."
But, "God is a God of war, a terrible and avenging God."
Matthew was wrong.
Jesus declares that he came purposely to bring his sword.
"Think not that I am come to send peace on earth. I
came not to send peace but a sword.
104 The Last Word
"For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother.
"And a man's foes shall be they of his own household"
(Matt. 10:34).
And this is your sweet Jesus
—"the prince of peace."
Did he die by the sword?
Let some hypocritical church prelate explain this church
attitude toward humanity.
Here is another shock for the modern church smoozler.
"And Pilate asked Jesus, saying, Art thou the king of
the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest it"
(Luke 23:3).
Jesus is the Greek form of Joshua.
Joshua means increased wealth, savior of the Jews.
God gave to the Jews Canaan, meaning merchandising
and trading, to increase their wealth.
"A spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me have"
(Luke 24:39).
"There shall no flesh be saved" (Mark 13:20).
"They that are in the flesh cannot please God" (Rom.
8:8).
"Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh
be justified; for by the law is the knowledge of sin" (Rom.
3:20).
"For sin is the transgression of the law" (1 Jno. 3:4).
"For the law worketh wrath ; for where no law is there
is no transgression" (Rom. 4:15).
Here is the capsheaf of this tommyrot:
"God manifests in the flesh" (1 Tim. 3:16).
God cannot please himself.
God cannot be saved after he manifests in the flesh.
"Jesus is the word."
"And the word was made flesh" (Jno. 1:14).
"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God"
(1 Cor. 15:50).
Now, how did Jesus and the two thieves hanged with him
slip into paradise? >
The Last Word 105
"No man hath ascended up to heaven but he that came
down from heaven" (Jno. 3:13).
Did these thieves come down from heaven?
What about Elijah going up to heaven by a whirlwind?
(2 Kings 2:11).
How about the translation of Enoch, and of Mary?
Here is a slice of juicy cannibalism :
"Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you" (Jno. 5:16).
"Ye shall eat no manner of blood whether it be of fowl
or of beast" (Lev. 7:26).
"And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel or
of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any man
ner of blood, I will even set my face against that soul that
eateth blood" (Lev. 17:10).
"Neither did his brethren believe in Jesus" (Jno. 6:5).
Christ says: "I judge no man" (Jno. 8:15).
"The father judgeth no man but hath committed all judg
ments unto his son" (Jno. 5:22).
Read the following, you poor, deluded church supporters
and feel ashamed because of your timidity, and your super
stitious fear:
"My father is greater than I" (Jno. 14:28).
"I and my father are one" (Matt. 10:30).
"They put on him a purple robe" (Jno. 19:2).
"They put on him a scarlet robe" (Matt. 27:28).
"And he bearing his cross went forth" (Jno. 19:17).
"They compelled a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, to
bear his cross" (Matt. 17:32).
"Now this man (Judas) purchased a field with the re
ward of iniquity and falling headlong he burst asunder in the
midst, and all his bowels gushed out" (Acts 1
:18).
"And he (Judas) cast down the pieces of silver in the
temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself, and the
chief priests took the silver pieces and bought with them the
potters' field" (Matt. 15:57).
The potters' field is Aceldama, meaning a field of blood.
106 The Last Word
An analysis of this word is a revelation. It means : The mighty
power of the sunlight and the female principle were the begin
ning, and this secretly signifies educational enlightenment,
and the church was the beginning of civilization.
"For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made; even his eternal power and God head" (Rom.
1:20).
Under gnosticism we reveal this as an evidence of plag
iarism of the gnostic wisdom.
Then they dispute themselves :
"Canst thou by searching find out God ? Canst thou find
out the almighty unto perfection?" (Job. 11:7).
"There is no searching of his understanding" (Isa. 11 :28).
"There is righteous, no not one" (Rom. 3:10).
"The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart"
(Isa. 47:1).
"The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree" (Ps.
92:12).
If there are none righteous, why this blather?
"The poor shall never cease out of the land" (Deut.
15:11).
"Thus saith the Lord, Behold I will raise up evil" (2 Sam.
12:11).
"I the Lord create evil" (Isa. 45:7).
"Evil shall come upon them saith the Lord" (Jer. 2:3).
"Bring upon them evil and destroy them" (Jer. 17:18).
"Where no law is there is no evil" (Rom. 4:15).
In brief, the laws are made to create evil to support church
and state, and humiliate and destroy the common people.
This system produced the outrageous English law called
the "Benefit of Clergy." A criminal appearing in the courts
with his priest, no matter what his crime, upon repeating the
"neck-verse," the first verse of the 51st Psalm, was turned
over to his priest without trial.
It is clear, those who contemplated committing crime
kept their magic verse at the end of their tongues.
The Last Word 107
"The creature was made subject to vanity" (Rom. 8:20).
The creature is he who is satisfied to exist by the advice
of his priest.
"The Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all
these prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning
thee" (1 Kings 22:23).
Doesn't that shock you. Do you still have confidence?
"God said unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I
will have mercy."
So, after all, it is God doing all this nasty stuff, and
this is godly justice.
"There is nothing unclean of itself, but to him that esteem-
eth anything unclean, to him it is unclean" (Rom. 14:15).
That settles it. A man may do as he pleases and it is
all right if he thinks so.
"Knoweth the God of peace be with you all" (Rom.
15:33).
"The Lord is a man of war" (Exodus 16:22).
Now, are there two gods, one of peace and one of war?
"Dare any of you having a matter against another, go
to law before the unjust, and not before the saints" (1 Cor.
6:1). Ha! Ha! "Benefit of Clergy."
A saint means a pious Jew (Ps. 16:3) or a christian
believer (Rom. 1:7, 8:27; Heb. 6:10).
"The saints shall judge the world" (1 Cor. 5:3).
"There is utterly a fault among you because ye go to
law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong?
Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?"
(1 Cor. 6:7).
Why then corrective laws? Why government at all?
Why take your case before the saints?
Let every man protect himself.
Why condemn the vigilantes?
"If a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him" (1 Cor.
11:14).
"If a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her" (1 Cor.
11:15).
108 The Last Word
Now what do you think of the God that produced both?
What do the bobbed-haired women of today think of this ?
How about the length of the finger and toe nails?
This is the limit of impudence.
"Take eat, this is my body, this cup is the new testament
in my blood" (1 Cor. 11:24, 25).
The so-called Lord's supper is nothing but the revival
of cannibalistic rites, a proof that christianity is but heathen
ism—absorbing all religions by plagiarism.
"If the woman will learn something, let her ask her
husband at home" (1 Cor. 14:35).
Ha! Ha! Suppose the husband is an ignoramus?
Suppose the woman has no husband?
"If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant" (1 Cor.
14:38).
What the heck does the church care ? Why school taxes ?
"I knew a man in Christ caught up to the third heaven"
(2 Cor. 12:2).
How many heavens are there?
"Being crafty I caught you with guile" (2 Cor. 12:16).
Yes, being a criminal myself, I caught you with crime.
Craft means cunning, fraud.
Guile means deceit, duplicity, fraud.
"If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing"
(Gal. 5:2).
Why the difference?
"And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and
it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you"
(Gen. 17:11).
Both Moses and Abraham were circumcised. What about
God's command to the Jews? Abraham is the father of all.
Here is a hot one :
"Jesus Christ being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God" (Phil. 2:6-11.
Can you beat that? God a spirit, no one ever having
seen his form, yet here it is admitted he has a form.
Jesus Christ is posed as a man on earth. Then why not
The Last Word 109
every man declare himself as God and beat hell into, or out
of, every other man who does not worship him?
"Servants obey in all things your masters" (Col. 3:22).
Where is the line of human equality in the church ?
"Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss" (Thes. 5:26).
Such vulgarity!
"Suffer not a woman to teach nor to usurp authority over
the man but to be in silence" (2 Tim. 2:12).
Ha! Ha! She put it over God when she got the female
voting franchise across in the United States. She even sits
as a judge, and in legislative assemblies, and as state gover
nors. Keep it up, old gal.
"Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for the
stomach's sake and thine often infirmities" (2 Tim. 5:23).
Fine advice during the time the 18th Amendment was
swinging its hellish club —but the priests had theirs.
"All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer per
secution" (2 Tim. 3:12).
If this godly life is so urgent, why does not God protect
his own? No better evidence exists to prove that the whole
thing is a rank fake. An all-powerful God capable of pre
venting such abuses, and fails to do so, is unworthy of even
common respect. The following is in keeping with the idea
of persecutions:
"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth" (Heb. 12:6).
If a man loves his wife and goes home and gives her
a beating he lands in jail.
"He that spareth his rod hateth his son" (Prov. 13:24).
How utterly inhuman.
"Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations"
(James 1 :2).
Why then do they teach people to pray to the Lord, "Lead
us not into temptation"?
It is essential that these inconsistencies be explained.
James was on a jag when he said :
"Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
110 The Last Word
God, for God cannot be tempted with evil and neither tempteth
he any man" (James 1:13).
"God did tempt Abraham" (Gen. 22:1).
Either James is wrong or Abraham was not a man.
If "God is in us, and a part of us," why cannot he prop
erly guide us?
Is sin an essential thing in the development of humanity,
that all must be legislated into it?
"Hath not God chosen the poor of this world?" (James
2:5).
This is hypocrisy on its face. It would be a criminal God
who would discriminate between his creations. Nature is not
based upon such vulgar selfishness.
Why, with his all prevailing powers, should God bind
any part of humanity in grief, pain and sorrow?
We may now recognize those responsible for our bread
and soup lines.
"If any man offend not in words, the same is a perfect
man" (James 3 :2).
Offend whom? Why, the priesthood, of course.
Sorrow and poverty are the punishments of those who
do not cringe to and pay tribute to the church.
"The earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up" (2 Peter 3:10). Then why worry?
Why, then, all this foolish prattle about God. Man is to
live all his life in misery, then be burned up. The whole
world is to go to hell.
"The earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found
no place for them" (Rev. 20:11).
Now, does that clear up the mystery?
The whole thing was a fake.
Should the Bible be suppressed?
If not, why not?
There is a final reason far more urgent than what we
have shown.
Which heaven do they mean?
Heaven means government.
The Last Word 111
Earth means producing mankind.
These are to be destroyed to make way for the "King
of Kings" and the "Lord of Lords."
There is ample evidence to prove this.
The one great purpose of the ecclesiastical exploitation
in the United States, is to convert this republic into an earthy
kingdom, that the pope of Rome may remove his seat here
and become this "King of Kings" of his own world.
This eternal preaching of a kingdom here in the United
States is rank treason against this republic.
Already we have about scrapped our constitution:
Any intelligent student of this subject may take a Bible
and find ample evidence of a great conspiracy against this
nation.
"The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms
of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and
ever" (Rev. 11 :15).
If there is any doubt about this meaning our established
nations and forms of government, the following clears it up :
"And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made
a shew of them openly triumphing over them in it" (Col. 2:15).
The following specifically proves premeditation in bring
ing about this insulting humiliation of previous rulers :
"We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of this world"
(Eph. 6:12).
"And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the
rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves in dens
of the rocks" (Rev. 6:15).
Then what?
"And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond to receive a mark in their right hand, or in
their foreheads;
"And that no man might buy or sell, save he that hath
this mark" (Rev. 13:16, 17).
Again we warn the people of the United States, if there
112 The Last Word
is no truth in these things, the Bible should not be permitted
to remain in circulation, to frighten the ignorant masses.
These threats are examples for dishonest men to use in
coercing the people to surrender their original national rights
and independence.
At this time the people are confronted with a possibility
of these threats being put into actual practice.
The national government is branding the nation with
similar code marks of the most irritating character.
At the time of the origin of the so-called scriptures, finger
printing was unknown, but now a threat goes forth to brand
every man, woman and child as potential criminals, along
with identified criminals, with universal finger-printing —the
most contemptible insult ever offered to mankind.
THE BOOK OF REVELATION
The so-called Book of Revelation was not added to the
scriptures until sixteen hundred years of the christian scheme
had tormented the world. It is the boldest part of the Bible,
revealing, as it does, a brazen attempt to seize control of the
world through a connivance with strong political influences,
and sycophant powers, by which it seeks to reduce greater
humanity to a state of helpless slavery.
The United States is the only substantial nation on earth
which may be recognized as the true Biblical Babylon.
In the code Babylon means mixture and confusion of
peoples and tongues.
Here we have that conglomerate mass and mixture of
peoples drawn from every other nation.
The usurpative church originally, before the discovery of
America, united its efforts and ambition in an attempt to
blend all the established nations in Europe into one com
posite nation, hence it assumed the name catholic, meaning
universal.
In all history this was the most brazen attempt at usurpa
tive power and control every attempted by men.
The Last Word 113
By assuming an attitude of pomp and splendor, it gradu
ally enticed the rulers of European nations into its own ranks,
then by creating jealousies and quarrels between civil rulers,
it assumed a position as mediator which gradually developed
into a dictatorship, to such a degree that popes crowned and
deposed kings at their will, even placing the crown upon the
head of a kneeling king, then kicking it off to show his con
tempt for civil rulers.
Such human skunks who would thus permit such dis
respect were unfit to hold any kind of office.
The popes of Rome maintained this so-called temporal
power over the rulers of Europe for five hundred years.
A thousand years of degrading ignorance, and the ulterior
training by the church, made of the common, ignorant people
a plastic, militant mob, to do the bidding of the priesthood.
The terrors of this situation were revealed when popes
desired to dethrone kings. They excommunicated kings, and
at the same time declared the people released from their oath
of allegiance to their kings, which at once set up a condition
of rebellion and revolution, frequently leading to destructive
wars to further embarrass the nations.
This was manifestly a part of the great secret scheme
to drive the European peoples into one universal nation, with
the catholic church as a dictatorship, with the pope as the
supreme head of all, fulfilling the revelation of a "King of
Kings" and "Lord of Lords."
It was this situation in Europe which kept the nations
in constant quarrels and warfare, with the church of Rome
concealed behind the skirts of the stronger side. There was
not one year of peace in Europe covering a period of about
six hundred years.
This was a dangerous period for the church also, be
cause this constant state of irritation occasionally aroused some
strong man's ire and he resented the encroachments of the
church, and this encouraged other rulers to do likewise, and
usurpative popes were suppressed, which proved conclusively
they were not all-powerful gods upon earth, and that only by
114 The Last Word
deceit and treachery had they acquired their ruling powers.
With the discovery of America a new and real wilder
ness was opened, and the church promptly seized upon this
opportunity to escape from its precarious position in Europe,
where nature had refused to blend nations and tongues into
one universal body. It promptly began to lay the foundation
for the new Babylon, so essential to its purposes, in the United
States. Even this name seemed to intimate that Europe had
refused to comply with God's scheme of universalism, and God
had provided a way out of the provoking dilemma.
The church quickly recognized that here they could as
semble all nations in one, with even more confusion than in
Europe.
It was a diplomatic thing that they decided, in due time,
to surrender the temporal power of the pope over Europe,
and bargain with Europe to make the new country a dump
ing ground for all the undesirable classes of the nations.
The church lived, thrived and fattened off the supersti
tious, evil classes. Without evil there would be no excuse
for the church.
The first colonists were shiploads of convicts out of Eng
land's overcrowded prisons, wreaking with vermin and con
tagious diseases.
Oglethorpe and Hudson were pioneers in this wholesale
deportation. Georgia, and the Hudson Bay country, being
the depositories for shiploads brought over.
The monastic orders were the pioneer church founders.
Their early trails are strewn with the ruins of their ugly
monastic dens.
The building of these monasteries ceased when the church
became established.
From the very beginning the church guided, controlled,
and fostered the elements for its new Babylon, bringing over
and distributing whole colonies of people of all the nations
of Europe, in a manner to develop a succeeding voting power
to control elections.
Today the catholic vote is cast en bloc, manipulated by
The Last Word 115
their secret Jesuitry, which have been deported from every
large nation in Europe, to nestle in the soft arms of the
United States.
At last the church felt secure in its new world, and in
the year 1870, the vatican made peace with Europe by with
drawing the long enjoyed "temporal power."
The United States was recognized as the new Babylon
secretly controlled by the vatican, a realization of the earliest
ambitions of the church to establish a universal nation to
rule the earth, with the pope as "King of Kings" and "Lord
of Lords."
It is in the United States the fulfillment is to occur.
If what we quote from the Bible is not true it should be
suppressed as an evil influence.
If they are truth then we must accept as truth the fol
lowing declarations:
This revelation was given to Jesus Christ, the head of
the church, as things which were to come to pass :
"He hath made us kings and priests" (Rev. 1:5).
"He shall come with clouds, and all kindreds of the earth
shall wail because of him" (Rev. 1:7).
In the code, clouds mean great numbers of afflictions,
and hypocrits.
Earth means the producing masses of people.
"I will come on thee as a thief" (Rev. 3:3).
Not like a thief, but as a thief, is very significant.
"We shall reign on the earth" (Rev. 5:10).
Those who labor and slave to support this villainous thing
would better awaken.
"Right now this nation has ample evidence that treacher
ous encroachment is being pulled off.
Just read the following and do some thinking:
"There went out a horse that was red; and power was
given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth
and that they should kill one another" (Rev. 6:4).
Is it a godly virtue to thus inspire war?
Horse means an instrument of war.
116 The Last Word
Red always symbolizes bloodshed.
Take a view of the world situation today, and see if the
trend is not to execute this threat.
"I beheld a black horse and he that sat on him had a
pair of scales, and I heard a voice say: A measure of wheat
for a penny, and a measure of barley for a penny" (Rev. 6:6).
This was the instruction this government attempted to
fulfill that sent our corn price down to the previously un
known price of 1-1 cents a bushel, a short time ago. Over
production had nothing to do with it. This was very evident
by the advance of corn to 90 cents per bushel when the specu
lators had absorbed the supply.
This nation was marked for all these cruelties from the
beginning.
"I beheld a pale horse, and the name that sat on him was
death, and hell followed with him. And power was given
unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the
sword and with hunger, and with death and with the beasts
of the earth" (Rev. 6:8).
Listen, you unthinking, unreasoning masses, who slave
to support the ravenous church and priesthood in addition to
your government. This threat is made to you.
Horse means war.
Death here, means the slaughter of war.
Hell means the grave.
Sword means bloodshed.
Earth means the humble producers.
Beasts mean cruel government officials.
Now this is all called the vengeance of God—"holy and
true."
Does any man deserve to live who will sanction such
hellish deeds, and still worship anything responsible for them
as an all-powerful God?
Is there no evidence of a previous attempt to execute
this murderous scheme?
How about the murderous crusades?
Popes stood in open fields preaching these awful things
The Last Word 117
which sacrificed the lives of unknown millions of innocent
men, women and children.
They enthused their victims by filling them with a de
sire to go somewhere to "rescue the tomb" of the "sweet
Jesus," who admitted he came with a sword to kill all who
would not kneel and kiss the dirty feet of popes.
These popes knew they were putting all these people
in hell by preaching false pretense.
Jesus never existed as a human being.
Je means ever-existing, and sus means supporter, sus
tenance.
Symbolizing the very class of people being sacrificed.
It was but a new form of the crucifixion.
The purpose was a political intrigue.
Jesus also is the Greek form of Joshua, another fake.
Joshua means increased wealth, savior of the Jews.
But the "crusades" were picnic excursions compared with
the hellish inquisition.
Nothing in human history compares with this premedi
tated outrage on civilization.
It is estimated that exceeding fifty millions of innocent
people were sacrificed and tortured to death by fiends and
devils in the direct service of the catholic church.
As a curse for permitting this awful crime, Europe should
now be a withering desert.
These things, committed in the name of the church, and
the christian God, were, secretly, but means to an ungodly
end—the ridding of Europe of its over-population of unre-
ligious and non-productive people, to keep down revolutions.
Subsequently, inspired wars have served the same purpose.
The late world war, in which the United States was
involved, it is estimated, cost the world more than forty mil
lion lives.
Another such war is now imminent. The United States
cannot avoid participating in this carnage, because it now
is an international institution. Examine closely the nations
most persistent that war should occur, and you will uncover
118 The Last Word
and expose the secret clique guilty of such crimes against na
ture and humanity.
Let us now continue the revelation.
"Under the altar were the souls of them that were slain
for the word of God for the testimony which they held" (Rev.
6:9).
If the whole world knew the ulterior significance of this,
every church in christendom would be destroyed. It was for
the protection of the secrecy regarding the gnostic system
of philosophy, and science, which the originators of the ecclesi
astic scheme had confiscated and utilized to construct the
catholic church, that untold thousands had been deliberately
murdered for delving into the subject. This included many
priests, who were named saints to distinguish them from the
common herd. Perhaps the most conspicuous case was that
of the Jesuit, Lavoisier, who discovered the true character
of nitrogen, naming it azote, meaning no life. The church
cut off his head for this exposure that the element standing
for God was lifeless.
In Rome there is a grusome imitation of this fake, merely
to give importance to this verse, Rev. 6:9. In the rusty old
Pantheon is a bin filled with the rotting bones of the so-
called saints.
Also in New Orleans may be found a similar pile, in the
old grave-yard.
These are not placed in graves because God promised to
keep the saints out of hell. Hell means the grave.
Now, here is an acknowledgment that all this hellish
cruelty is church vengeance:
"How long O Lord dost thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?" Now, who made
this squawk?
Rev. 6:12-17 proves, beyond all doubt, the savage determi
nation of the church to fill ignorant humanity with hysterical
superstitious fears, because, it is a lie on its face.
Now listen to the following declaration and ponder your
future :
The Last Word 119
"The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our Lord, and his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever"
(Rev. 11:15).
This is the voice of the catholic church speaking. Our
Lord is the pope, and his Christ is his authority exercised
through the control of civil government.
This is one of the most brazen utterances to be found
in the Bible. The head of the church, a secondary institution
of the world, has seized control of all forms of government,
through a fake character, merely symbolizing a church fiction.
This Christ is the Greek Kristos, the Greek form of the
Hebrew Messiah, which merely means authority.
Again we are warned:
"I come as a thief" (Rev. 16:15).
We may now understand the trickery.
"Babylon came in remembrance, before God, to give unto
her the cup of wine of the fierceness of his wrath" (Rev.
16:19).
"In remembrance" is suggestive of the previous fictitious
Babylon, before the book of Revelation was written.
"And he cried mightily with a strong voice saying : Baby
lon the great is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
and the hold of every foul spirit.
"For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of
her fornications, and the kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed
rich through the abundance of her delicacies.
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins" (Rev. 18:2, 3, 4).
"Babylon is fallen, that great city, because she made all
nations drunk of the wine of her fornication.
"Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed.
"Forsake her and let us go every one into his own coun
try" (J er. 51:7, 8).
Now, there is but one nation to which this may be ap
plied, and that is the United States.
Let us see if we can uncover the methods by which this
120 The Last Word
conglomerate mass of peoples is being plundered and brought
into a state of universal poverty, ignorance, crime and insanity.
It is a palpable fact, that this nation is being systematically
smothered, to destroy its prosperity. Confusion is everywhere.
The bold evidence that these conditions do exist is seen
in the bread-lines, with unknown millions pleading for a crust,
and a spoonful of musty bean-soup.
Armies of shame-faced men, with shovels, pretending to
be engaged upon public works, to cut down the real beggar
elements, and the disgusting false-pretense of giving employ
ment to thousands by the governments, as a dispensation of
charity. The government should not be made an employment
bureau.
Unknown millions who have not sufficient intelligence
to perceive what is being done to them are being brought
down into the dust of national shame.
"From the dust thou art and unto the dust shalt thou
return" is no idle joke. Ask the men who are piddling mud
along the public highways for bean-tickets.
The prisons will not hold the people being jammed into
them. Thousands seek to be sent to prison to avoid starvation.
For the most trivial offenses thousands are sent to prisons
for life, or are electrocuted. Yet there is not one visible evi
dence that cruel and unnatural punishments have reduced the
awful volume of crime. On the contrary, there are so many
laws on the statute books, no man can escape accusation if he
has an enemy to prefer the charge and take him before ill-
natured and prejudiced judges.
Our public hospitals loom like great cities, and their walls
bulge with inmates.
There are not sufficient asylums to house the increasing
imbecilic and insane people.
And now comes the crown of this horrid structure —
taxation.
If all the crimes in the United States were rolled into
one, the mass would be trivial compared with the endless
forms of taxation.
The Last Word 121
Whether true or not, it was published and not disputed
that, when the loaf of bread has reached the family table, the
finger-prints of fifty-three different forms of direct and indi
rect taxes will be found upon it.
Taxation to the point of confiscation is throttling the
people, and this reveals the underlying enemy.
The word ecclesia was the legislative body which ruled
ancient Athens.
The ecclesia taxed the people until all private property
was confiscated, and it smothered the people under vicious,
murderous laws, which permitted petty officers to kill persons
for the most trivial things.
The exploiters of the catholic church adopted the name
ecclesia, as its higher authoritative name, and named its church
catholic, meaning universal.
Now, examine the conditions in the United States:
Taxation is impoverishing the masses of people.
Farm lands have practically been confiscated by mort
gages.
The only reason a direct tax is not placed upon the head
of each and every individual is due to the fact that it is being
reserved for the last motion in this great human tragedy.
"And every man shall give a ransom for his soul to the
Lord when thou numberest them" (Ex. 30:12).
"The rich shall not give more than the poor" (Ex. 30:15).
Now compare the above with our constitution.
Sec. IX. Powers denied to the United States.
Clause 4. "No capitation or other direct tax shall be
laid unless in proportion to the census or enumeration
hereinbefore directed to be taken."
Our immigrations were so numerous this census could
not be uniform, therefore a per capita tax of ten dollars was
placed upon the heads of all persons coming into the United
States.
It has been left to the states to overcome this weak spot
in taxation, by one of the most contemptible forms of taxation
—the so-called sales-tax.
122 The Last Word
It is at once seen that the "rich and poor pay alike."
This is in keeping with the following:
"And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand.
"And that no man might buy or sell save he that had
the mark" (Rev. 13:16, 17).
When this was written, finger-printing was unknown.
This government has already branded all lines of busi
ness, and has proposed the passage of a law making potential
criminals, along with real criminals, of every man, woman
and child in the United States by compulsory finger-printing.
If the people ever submit to this traitorous outrage, then
they are not fit to participate in a decent, respectable, na
tional life.
There is no name in the English language too vile and
vulgar to paste onto those who propose such an insult to decent
citizenship, as a code to identify them.
Today, the people of the United States are victims of a
craze for making laws.
Despite the palpable fact that each new law creates a
new set of criminals, adding to the burden of national ex
penses, the mills of the political gods, and their legislative
lords, grind out thousands of new laws annually to further
mulct the people. Thousands of these laws are mere traps
for use in emergencies.
Therefore, it is urgent to identify and locate the under
lying cause for such insane methods.
Ah! Here is the great secret:
"Now we know that what things soever the law saith,
it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty" (Rom.
3:19).
This is a raw and impudent proposition.
All free speech shall be muzzled.
All people shall be legislated into criminals.
"By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified
—for by the law is the knowledge of sin" (Rom. 3:20).
The Last Word 123
The hell-hounds who uttered these treasonable things un
fortunately are dead, and burning in their own hell—the grave,
else they should be burned in public places.
There is every reason to believe that the crazy, legisla
tive disease in the United States, today, is based upon these
treacherous Bible suggestions. The theory of legislating all
into crime, and branding all as potential criminals by finger
printing, and taking all dignity and respectability out of the
business of the nation by tagging, labeling, coding and the
other fool stuff now being done, could come from no other
source.
Romans 3:20 plainly declares, that men shall not be jus
tified in using initiative common sense, and reason, as indi-
dividuals, in their acts.
Therefore, we may safely draw the conclusion that the
laws are created for the protection and vindication of public
officials in their acts.
"Where there is no law there is no crime" (Rom. 4:15).
"Sin is the transgression of the law" (1 Jno. 3:4).
"Crime is not imputed where there is no law" (Rom.
5:13).
Why, then, are we deluged with a multitude of vicious,
provoking, accusing laws?
To commercialize crime for the profit it yields.
Men are purposely provoked into crime.
"The law worketh wrath" (Rom. 4:15).
"Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and
the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood; so the forc
ing of wrath bringeth forth strife" (Prov. 30:33). Could
anything be made plainer by words?
"A wrathful man stirreth up strife" (Prov. 15:18).
"Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrath
ful anger take hold of them" (Ps. 69:24).
"The law is our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,
but after that faith is come we are no longer under a school
master" (Gal. 3:24, 25).
There you have a clean-cut declaration that laws are
124 The Last Word
made to arouse wrath in men that they may create strife
to vindicate the necessity for laws, with the priesthood ex
empted, as they were under the 18th amendment.
The law does not accuse a priest, no matter what crime
he may commit, because he takes refuge in the church, sacred
against "intrusion of the law.
The cold-blooded murderer, Moses, is a good example
of this church protection.
"And of these cities which ye shall give, six cities shall
ye have for refuge" (Num. 35:13).
These refuge cities were for "mankillers" of Israel.
Israel means the church of Christ.
Christ means the law, authority.
Christ redeems the church from the "curse of the law."
Now read the following and make up your mind whether
or not the legislative powers are cultivating crime by smoth
ering the people in a multitude of needless laws for the profit
they yield.
"Either make the tree (man) good, and his fruit good;
or else make the tree (man) corrupt, and his fruit corrupt;
for the tree (man) is known by his fruit" (Matt. 12:33).
This commercializes human evil as well as normal human
production.
Every new law put upon the statute books sows the seeds
for new crime to give employment to political straphangers,
and yields a new return of profits, by fines, penalties, and
taxation.
There is no way of estimating, or revealing, the vast
volumes of money milked from the helpless people under cover
of endless laws, or the purposes for which these monies are
expended. Therefore it is safe and reasonable to declare
that this abnormal diversion of monies from legitimate chan
nels is a direct cause for our state of financial depression at
this time, because the cultivation of corruption and crime by
law, makes money its yield of fruits. Thus money is diverted
from its legitimate functions, as a measure, and circulating
medium, in the exchanges of legitimate human products.
The Last Word 125
The horrible confusion of this modern Babylon, today,
is identical with the fabulous Babylon in Genesis.
"There is the name called Babel; because the Lord did
there confound the language of all the earth ; and from thence
did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth" (Gen. 11:9).
Now let the people of the United States see and under
stand the truth. That was the Babylon of yesterday. Today,
the Babel of the new testament is the United States, the only
great nation with the same mixture and confusion of peoples
and languages. It is about to meet with the same fate.
If this is not true the Bible is a pack of lies, and should
be suppressed.
To emphasize we repeat:
"Babylon is fallen, that great city, because she made all
nations drunk of the wine of her fornications.
"Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed.
"Forsake her and let us go every one into his own coun
try" (Jer. 51:7,8).
This may be addressed to no other nation on earth. The
United States is doomed.
"MAN KNOW THYSELF"
To Know Man Is to Know All that We Live For
Man Is a Living World
The Image and Likeness of the Greater World
The Soul Man, Like the Creative Impulse of Nature,
Is Invisible
The Soul and Spirit
Of the Visible Material Image
What a wonderful thing to contemplate: this seemingly
living, animated creature, standing before us, or moving from
point to point, is but a past-perfect mechanical body, wholly
under control of an invisible conscious power, cancealed be
hind its walls, which dictates its every motion and act. More
126 The Last Word
over, that inner power is an organized aggregation of vital
forces, each being clothed with a material body of which it
is the spirit. All of which is invisible and concealed beneath
the composite, visible external body. A human city surrounded
by living walls.
If discretion dictates caution in approaching this well-
armed protecting wall, how much more alert should we be
in attempting to pass within and get acquainted with the walled
city, and its active subjects.
The first impression is a tremendous shock.
Why, this is a living community, each organ being the seat
of a ruling spirit having definite functions, and all these func
tions operate in unison, for the perfect control of the whole,
including the external protecting and supporting wall.
The silent though ever active life.
Now we may recognize the significance of the saying:
Every man may think without fear of the law. It is the man
who expresses his thoughts aloud, or puts his thoughts into
physical action, who is responsible for his words and acts.
Therefore, the real man is a subjective being.
The gnostic beliefs that a subjective mental power, cap
able of projection, was one of man's superior faculties, was
carefully concealed by the ecclesiastic exploiters who smoth
ered the gnostic system, even to the point of suppressing mes
merism, as a concealed magnetic power, as fully demonstrated
by hypnotism. They held the greatest fear for this great
mental power, which definitely disputed their own claims to
divine powers.
As we approach the study of the physical body it reveals
two very remarkable characteristics, which prove it to be a
visible reflection of the inner organism.
A gross division —the head, the thorax, the abdomen and
the pelvis, each having its own special organs seated therein.
The more important, visible division, with close and inti
mate association with the inner organism, is recognized in the
flesh, muscle, bone and marrow.
We quickly perceive, by their mechanical parts, that the
The Last Word 127
four greater divisions are the external agents of the whole
body, and the four secondary divisions are the mediums be
tween the inner organization and the outer executive body.
The inner organization dictates, and the outer executes,
each department having its own specific functions.
The head is the seat of mentation and judgment.
The thorax is the seat of respiration and circulation.
The abdomen is the seat of digestion and distribution.
The pelvis is the seat of excretion and reproduction.
Each has its visible external agents.
The face, and its special sense organs, exercise a censor
ship over all that enters into the body.
The head, the senses of seeing and hearing—the eyes and
ears.
The thorax, the sense of smell and breathing—the nostrils.
The abdomen, the sense of taste—the mouth.
The pelvic organs, the sense of feeling—the flesh.
Let us now step inside this substantial outer structure
and see who is in charge.
Sure enough, the "I am" is seated in the brain, having
a supervision over all the living processes which erect the
outer protecting structures. This is the seat of mentation
and reason.
The telephonic and telegraphic lines of the brain, are
the cerebro-spinal and the sympathtic nerves, reaching every
portion of the physical structure.
The external agents of the brain are the eyes and the
ears, giving the brain direct contact with the universal world
—the nervous ganglia are the stations.
The inner thoracic agents are the heart and lungs, and
their mediums of circulation and respiration, the blood-vessels,
with equal ramifications.
The inner abdominal agents are the stomach and liver,
and their distributive mediums, the lymphatics and small in
testines.
Lymph means water, and true to the saying, that animal
life begins in the waters, the first forms of living elements
128 The Last Word
for the nourishment of the tissues are found in the lymph.
The inner pelvic agents are the bladder and the kidneys,
which expel the waste waters of the system; the skin, with
its sweat glands, assisting by the excreting tubes of the skin,
which resemble those of the kidneys, ending in a spiral.
This clearly defines four organic centers, out of which
come the essential streams of life, each stream carrying a
vital element for the construction and maintenance of the outer,
physical man, who provides the raw materials for the nour
ishment of all.
This brings us to the real problem.
THE VITAL PURPOSE
We must recognize four essential, substantial elements
in this revelation of man, each with its own seat of action.
The brain, the seat of mentation—with the face and ex
ternal sense organs as its external agents.
The heart, the seat of circulation —the arms and hands
as its external agents.
The stomach, the seat of digestion—with legs and feet
as external agents.
The bladder, the seat of excretion —with visible external
agents.
It would seem, by this classification, that we are dealing
with several individualities, which are striving to accomplish
some common purpose or end. Nevertheless, if one of these
vital centres ceases to function, they all cease, and the body
dies.
The evidence is so manifest, that this thing which we
call man, is but a unit in a creative system, compels us to
compare him with a higher suggestion and impulse, and this
carries us into nature itself.
Man is but a revealed reflection of a universal unit, de
veloped to a living, thinking part of a greater being.
To demonstrate this requires that we compare this re
markable human symbol with original universal forms.
The Last Word 129
Nature has revealed a logical system of recording her
spiritual and physical revelations by the creation of man.
Let us now return to nature and compare her with this
so-called human reflection.
The head reflects the universal.
The thorax reflects the planetary.
The abdomen and pelvic, the earth and sea.
^) The electronic.
.^sfXfffi,^ The vibratory,
^-asffi^^jjs^ The gaseous.
@ The fluid.
Here we have the basic characteristics of all the states
of planetary existence.
They demonstrate their primary positions beyond dispute.
Every visible, living thing in nature must adjust itself to
these primary, creative waves.
The Positive Motion
Electron Nitrogen Oxygen Carbon Hydrogen
Potentiality Vibratory Gaseous Solid Fluid
These are the positive spirits which create the first mole
cule of living, visible, material forms.
Out of this molecule, symbolized by the hydrogen spiral,
is born the composite "image and likeness."
We have visible reminder of this—living matter first man
ifest in the waters, the sea.
The Negative Motion
Sea Earth Planetary Universal Animal
Breath Impulse Corpuscle
130 The Last Word
It must be observed that this secondary series of similar
waves are reversed and negative to the previous position as
positive life waves, the heads of the serpents pointing toward
the spiral, as though being backed or pushed out. This makes
each negative element an excrement of the preceding element,
and each wave must nourish the succeeding wave as its off
spring.
This is of the utmost importance, illustrating, as it does,
the origin of growth, the multiplying of the original molecule
to construct creative bodies with the power of reproduction.
The demonstration of this process is a revelation in vis
ible facts. Nothing having visible form, and having life, can
escape from the original system of waves. They must mani
fest in consecutive waves, consistency, or masses.
Even ecclesiasticism, in its fabulous system based upon
the confiscated gnostic wisdom, has acknowledged this.
The spiral, symbolizing the sea, is mere or mer.
Mary is derived from mere, meaning the sea.
Mary is the virgin attitude of creative nature and gives
birth to Jesus.
Je means ever-existent, sus means sustenance.
The English word sow, who suckles her pigs, is derived
from sus.
Therefore, the name Jesus as applied to the church scheme
means the producing masses which support the church.
In all the early philosophies the tree, preferably the apple
tree, has been adopted to symbolize the creative process to
the productive state.
We recognize this as the identical process by which man
is created; he also is a respiratory animal, evoluted out of the
lower animal kinds. It is only a theory of vain conceit that
poses mankind as a special dispensation. Such rank misuse
of the confiscated gnostic wisdom condemns the church.
By the use of the same philosophic tree the origin of the
theory of man being a special dispensation, by the church, is
exposed.
Eve, as the spiral root, means life—the waters.
The Last Word 131
Potential fruit
Nitrogen leaves
Oxygen limbs
Carbon body
Hydrogen root
Tne respiratory animals
'Respiration, breath
Circulation, the sap of
the tree
The earth—material
support
The sea, origin of
living bodies
Read from the spiral upward
Adam, as the supporting trunk means the earth, pro
duction.
Cain, as the branches, means the spreading vegetation.
Abel, as the leaves, means breath, respiration.
Seth, as the reproductive fruit, means the respiratory
animals.
Now see what follows this sybolism.
"And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he
called his name Enos; then began men to call upon the name
of the Lord" (Gen. 4:26).
Thus, following all other creations, a special dispensation
was born for the convenience of the ecclesiastical exploitations.
Enos, in the secret code, means mortal man.
En means to make, os means many, open mouths.
The first three names in Chronicles tell a great story.
Adam, the earth.
Seth, the respiratory animals, meaning tumult, the com
motion of numbers, noise, confusion, riot.
Enos, mortal man, subject to death, punishable with death,
subject to temptation and fall.
By their own Bible this special dispensation is condemned :
132 The Last Word
"For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts ;
even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the
other ; yea, they have all one breath ; so that man hath no pre
eminence above a beast: for all is vanity.
"All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn
to dust again.
Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and
the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?"
(Ecc. 3:19, 20, 21).
That quickly disposes of the special dispensation, abso
lutely essential to the fabulous ecclesiastical false-pretense.
While man
is,
as far as we may now sense, the highest
evoluted being in this creative system, he
is
but the last pro
duct of
a
preconceived process which
is
clearly measured by
the system of creative waves.
To classify mankind into inferior and higher divisions
is
criminal beyond all reason, and the institution which at
tempts to measure humanity by classifying men as beasts,
thus thrusting them back into lower forms, should be burned
in view of the whole world.
The church classifies the producing masses as cattle, mean
ing capital, and even its own congregation as sheep, with its
priests as shepherds.
It
is
equality of contact with educational opportunities
which should equalize all mankind.
The muddle-brained king, and his servile creature, and
the sodden-minded pope, and his sycophant fool who licks
his dirty feet, are all of identical organic and physical origin
and structure.
It
is
pitiful to observe how men, whose minds have been
deflected from the purposes of unprejudiced nature, have
misguided humanity into paths, which
it
was not intended they
should follow, to attain ends and purposes wholly evil and
selfish, merely for their own earthy glorification and profit.
Necessarily, nations of peoples, with their own concep
tion of governments and religions, preceded the aggressive
and usurpative christian exploitation, with its false-pretense
The Last Word 133
of religion, to conceal its ravenous political aspirations, and
which strive to suppress and supplant all other forms of gov
ernment and religion, and to merge them in a universal con
trol of both body and soul of humanity, that one human be
ing, the head of the structure, might pose as a god upon
earth, and the supreme, controlling spirit of all. Hence it
chose to name its pretended religious organization catholic,
meaning univeral.
In the light of gnostic reason and enlightenment, it is con
temptible to see to what extent the christian pretense attempted
to forestall nature, and assume, by confiscation, her preroga
tives, by suppressing the wisdom of the ages, and smother
ing the masses of people in abject ignorance for a thousand
years (486-1495).
Authentic history is witness to this.
As christianity grew in power, it developed its rank im
pudence.
Nature had a purpose to enlighten humanity, its highest
production, in a manner to establish universal mental contact,
and understanding, therefore, gnosticism —meaning to know —
was the natural religion.
This was a traditional record of creative processes, which
promoted man as the highest evoluted being, and attempted
to place all mankind in mental contact with the universal wis
dom. This may be demonstrated through a knowledge and
understanding of the natural system of creative waves estab
lished by the basic elements in their active state.
The so-called christian religion associated with itself the
most vicious type of human government—named the ecclesia,
taken from the legislative body of ancient Athens.
This vicious ecclesia confiscated all the private property
of the people by taxation, and smothered them beneath a mul
titude of criminal laws, which authorized arresting officers
to strike down their victims in the public streets.
An astouding reflection of this vicious attitude toward
the masses of people is seen in the United States, today. Never
before in our history have the federal and state governments
134 The Last Word
shown so vicious an attitude toward the people. Our con
stitution is practically abandoned and a savage despotism has
seized control. There is no possible means for ascertaining
the number of unemployed people actually suffering for want
of food. It is equally impossible to enumerate the endless
methods of taxation, and the purposes to which this legalized
graft are put.
Not even the government can estimate the number of laws
being ground out by law-crazed legislative bodies.
But, two glaring facts may be visioned by all who seek
the truth.
First, each new law placed upon the statute books either
mulcts the people in some form, or creates a new class of
criminals.
Second, a vast political following is being constructed by
the endless new offices required to execute endless laws.
It is equally impossible to enumerate the sycophants who
are thus supported by the powers which control this rampant
system. No attempt has ever been made to estimate and make
public the modes of expenditure for the vast sums collected.
In keeping with the outrageous taxation is the crazy-
quilt experimentations in so-called finances. There is no means
by which the outcome of this horrid thing may even be
guessed. There are but two elements which form the founda
tion for this wild-eyed experiment—production and taxation,
both squeezing the life-blood out of slaving humanity.
Not one evidence of sorrow or pity is visible in this fa
natical national experiment. Nevertheless those who are wise
to the usurpative purposes understand the grave dangers in
volved.
Vanity and egotism are diseases which destroy in men
common sense and reason, causing them to lose sight of the
simplest laws of nature. These laws may not be insulted
and abused with impunity. The body that abuses itself in
one part weakens the whole, and this reaction is inevitable in
the present situation in the United States.
The Last Word 135
Let us see if we may find a precedent for our national
experimentations.
The church has always sought to first control nations, that
it might usurp control of visible nature. Invisible nature re
sents this usurpation, and in due time will slam the con
temptible thing against its own lifeless imitation, church walls,
and the evil dens called monasteries, convents, and nunneries,
which conceal from public view its defaults, as the human
body conceals the operations of its inner organic system.
In like manner, political powers attempt to erect outer
protecting walls of productive people to maintain and support
them, while they maintain their secret methods and purposes
behind this wall of trusting ignorance.
If the original church believed it would strengthen itself
by casting humanity down into a state of ignorance, it is
reasonable to conclude that, equally selfish political parties
believe that they can have the same protection by casting the
producing people into a state of abject poverty by taxation.
Thus the church deprived humanity of its intellectual
strength, and the political powers deprived it of its material
strength.
This exactly corresponds with the present attitudes of
church and state.
If direct collusion may not be proven, a passive agree
ment may not be denied.
A species of bribery may always be found associated with
this usurpative system.
The church coaxes its priesthood with education.
It coaxes its congregation by promising the people pro
tection against the "curse of the law" (Gal. 3:13).
"The law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ" (Gal.
3:24).
"But after that faith is come we are no longer under
the schoolmaster" (Gal. 3:25).
Political parties coax their influential following by official
positions with liberal salaries. "Job funds to be used for cam
paign purposes" (T. S. Apl. 30:35).
136 The Last Word
This civilization has been led away from normal, natural
progression by the most contemptible influences.
Mankind is divided against its own natural development
by selfish elements. But the creative waves cannot be sup
pressed.
Creative nature intended that all mankind should be
brought into direct contact with universal wisdom, instead of
beind suppressed, to permit only a favored priesthood to mo
nopolize this wonderful privilege.
We shall now call upon divine nature to join us in a
drastic exposure of the misuse, and vicious abuse, of her won
derful gifts to mankind, her highest creation.
It is the series of creative waves which convict ecclesi-
asticism, and so-called christianity, of a brazen attempt to
usurp the powers of nature, that a sordid priesthood might
control the greater masses of mankind as herds of cattle and
sheep.
It is well for us to know the origin of the name man,
because this name helps to convict the so-called christian re
ligion of wilful plagiarism.
Ancient peoples recognized the sun as the great central
power of our planetary system, and through its warmth, light
and beneficial influences were developed the living things
upon our planet. But, they gave credit to a higher universal
creative power for the original impulse directing the spiritual
development of these creations, with man as the culminating
type. Therefore, the first great spiral body was our plane
tary sun, worshiped as the divine agent of that greater power.
It was man who worshiped the sun, which was to be
placed under control.
The ancients considered man as the soul or spirit emerg
ing from the great light—the sun.
The original Hindoo name for man was Aum, having
reference to the sun, as, later, the Latin homo, man, was om,
the sun.
The ancient Egyptian Pan meaning universal, was rec
ognized as min = man, the male principle in creative nature.
The Last Word 137
Thus, man is recognized as the highest created being on this
earth, and that means all mankind.
In Scotland man is mon, which is equivalent to the Eng
lish word mind, the Sanskrit manas, and the Greek monos,
all of which mean single, solitary, alone, Omon — "the one
sun," or maon —the one mother—the moon, the symbol of
magna mater.
Thus, man and woman symbolize the reproductive male
and female principles —the sun and the moon. The Anglo-
Saxon for moon is mo-na.
This all identifies man —male and female —as the crown
ing production of this planet; hence the ecclesiastic-christian
form of usurped government attempts to bring nature itself
under control upon this earth, by binding the greater hu
manity in abject, imbecilic ignorance.
This may be demonstrated, beyond dispute, by the use of
nature's own signature, the original creative waves, from which
no organized or progressive system can escape.
GNOSTIC CHART OF UNIVERSAL LIFE
Universal System of Creative Waves
Primary Elements
Positive Action Negative Reaction
Q-^/W0-""^^^0 ©"m "m ~'-^m*tu)iimn*'a^^\£<'Q
Electron Nitrogen Oxygen Carbon Hydrogen Carbon Oxygen Nitrogen Atom
Potential Vibratory Gaseous Solid Fluid Solid Gaseous Vibratory Absorption
Reflected Creations ,
First Planetary Revelation —Positive
Electron Motion Heat Fire Sun
The sun is a burning vortex continually nourished from
the universal source.
138 The Last Word
Second Planetary Revelation —Negative
Sun
Waters
Heat Light Reaction Dual Earth
Land Life Expansion Reproduction
Thus the sun creates the conditions for living beings upon
this planet, our earth.
Living material things originate in the waters, after the
earth has cast off its moon to become its helpmeet, after the
earth has assumed orbital motion — the story of Adam, the
rib, and Eve.
The original life creeps out of the waters onto the earth
and aspires to rise into the atmosphere.
The vegetation precedes animal life, upon the land, as the
prepared food for higher creations. Nevertheless, it exhibits
all the elemental senses corresponding with its position in the
creative scale.
We are compelled to understand that it is all one de
velopment of the essential parts for the final revelation of the
Image and Likeness"
of
The Great Unknown Mentation
The Earthy Creations and Formations
Sand Soil Clay Rock
Germs Weeds Grains Trees
Fishes Reptiles Fowls Beasts
Mountain
Fruits
Man
Mountain Hill Valley Plain
Spring Branch Rivulet River
Sea
Lake
The Last Word 139
It will be noted that these are positive waves trending
downward, with all heads pointing toward the sea-level.
All waves pointed toward the earth are positive and those
trending away from the earth are negative, the sea-level being
the point of neutrality.
Even the vegetation begins in the waters of the earth and
aspires upward, expanding in similar proportion to animal de
velopment, the bodies of both being controlled by the same
set of creative waves. The distinct difference, however, is in
the attachment of the vegetation to the earth, while the ani
mals have freedom of bodily motion. Hence the vegetation is
at the mercy of the animals which consume it as nourishing
food.
Thus animals feed upon the excrements of the earth.
Vegetation depends upon the external planetary and uni
versal influences to maintain it. Whereas the animals are
possessed of internal organs, and a system of mentation, giv
ing them the benefit of selectivity.
The vegetation means spiral motion, whereas the animals
may partake of the benefits of both spiral and independent
orbital motion, giving them access to greater mental nourish
ment.
We may now view with wonderment, and edification,
the culmination of this dual system. Step by step it reveals
itself by the eloquent system of creative waves, which, by
their very nature, cannot regurgitate back through each other,
nor bound, one over the other. They must reveal their natural
functions and purpose in the wonderful, preconceived, cre
ative scheme, by a reproduction of consecutive waves, or in
material masses or consistency.
The gnostic philosophy selected, and adopted, the serpent
as the only living creature which could reveal, by its motions,
the system of creative waves. It also adopted the apple tree,
as the most perfect demonstration in the vegetable kingdom.
140 The Last Word
Trunk Earth—Carbon
Root Sea—Hydrogen
Thus we have the gross physical symbol in the tree.
The leaves are the atmospheric nitrogen waves, feeding
upon the oxygen waves, which feed upon the carbon, which
feeds upon the hydrogen.
This fully demonstrates that each element in this system
feeds upon the preceding element as an excrement.
In every system there is a dead excrement, and a living
excrement having the power of reproduction.
Naturally, the evolution, from the beginning of physical
life upon the earth to the perfected man, now becomes our
most important study, but let it be understood, from the be
ginning, man is not a special dispensation, and nature is no
respecter of individual units. The unit must be mentally and
physically nourished by his own instructive efforts. His fail
ure and death mean nothing to the creative forces of nature.
Nothing is lost to the universal system, and consciousness of
individuality ceases when the unit ceases to function in the
great creative scheme.
Therefore, man being the highest evoluted being, should
be mentally and physically nourished to attain the highest con-
The Last Word 141
ANIMAL EVOLUTION
Read from the bottom upward
Lower Animals Monkey Man
Here are three visible steps in evolution. They involve our
wave system and suggest the origin of the caduceus.
Short Waves, Nitrogen
^\J\J^ Temptation
Longer Wavei, Oxygen — ■
— —° Aspiration
The Straight Line o Carbon, Realization
The Spiral Hydrogen, Approprial
142 The Last Word
ception and realization of his purpose on this earth. Any
deprivation of these normal necessities, while life is in the
human body, is crime against nature.
The greatest crime in history was the suppression of the
traditional gnostic wisdom, by the ecclesiastical exploitation,
and the smothering of humanity in ignorance. This necessi
tated its antagonism toward natural evolution, and the teach
ing of science and philosophy.
In his pursuit of and acquirement of food, man becomes
a living symbol of the wave system.
The first motion is to raise, up and down, the leg, which
symbolizes the highest expenditure of energy the nitrogen wave
The second motion is the forward trend which records,
by the footprints, the oxygen wave, y^^^^^oc
The third motion is the measure of the distance traversed,
the straight line of carbon. :>
The fourth motion records the end of the journey, and
the attainment of the object, the hydrogen spiral @
Therefore, this is a positive process, with initiative im
pulse arising in a mental centre, proving that all muscular
action has a mental origin.
We shall attempt to produce a comparative chart which
will broadly illustrate these mental and physical activities.
Hnw o C5
ajeW
4>uiBlsnS
snsaf
ISU113
P<>0
a"jiuesu[
MILT)
uoipnpojj
31d03d
iduoqmv
INONH3AOQ
OX
*dnp
■ootmo
jo)
pE»q
aip
o)
II
J3JSUEJJ
pUE
}1
MttM
S
p
U
E
4
pUE
SULIE
»41
pu«
'/aid
sii
oj
Xpoq
aqi
ajjw
pus
s3s[
aqj_
U01JSJDJC3
avojjeh
uoijnqiJisia
3OH
uoipv
pooig
S3DSn«
HS313
■sui^d
puE
uauiopqE
341
qy*3
jetiq
-uns
»qi
—
moifj,
30VWI
OX
■pwq
»qj
jo
sueSjo
ssuas
aqi
A"q
pajosuSD
jsjy
si
insists
tup
SuU3)it)
3utqiiisA3
J3ppcia
sXauptj!
UlEjg
PUESDEJ—
QVO
■|IEJ
eiq.
smo(|ems
luddias
sqj.
SSATM
JO
]
X
3A1JE
-2au
pus
3Ai}itod
341
jo
3uj
Aq
pwnpojd
<(poq
|eu»)Eui
juy
aqi
si
uioje
3qj_
,
u9i(dfouiry
Aq
papunojjns
^jedt
3ji]
c
'jaijeiu
jo
s[n3»|om
3uia|]
jsjij
»qj
si
[«jids
»4X
my
Jpqi
tn
siuaujjp
jGeui
-ua
SAijisod
»qi
9je
WS4X
uaJaipAjj
Ajojuqi^
us3a*xq
SOI1V1IWI
N0IIV13A3H
3HX
NVK
TVDISAHd
USS3N3SIT
aHV
30VHJ,,
ZHX
NVK
3INV9HO
AHVXSNVld
K31SAS
IVXHinai^
1VSH3AINfl
144 The Last Word
THE LAST WORD
This is the final message to determine if you are Jew
or Gentile, and whether you are a sane, self-reliant man, or
a cringing, superstitious fanatic.
It is an unanswerable test.
There is nothing wrong in being a sane, sensible Jew in
this conglomerate mass of nationalities, if religious fanati
cism is eliminated. The Jew has always been used as a tool
by the most deceitful clan that ever trod this earth.
The Jewish type of people was selected and figuratively
bargained with, to assume the parts they are alleged to have
taken in the foisting upon humanity of the treacherous, usurpa-
tive, so-called christian religion which, beneath its cowl, has
no religious significance whatever, it being but a secret, oath-
bound order bent upon seizing control of the world, and en
slaving the greater humanity, for its own selfish ends.
If, after studying the following evidences of brazen fraud,
you still adhere to, and help support, the christian church, you
can be classed as one of but two things; either you are a
blind, fanatical fool, or you are one of the sycophant tools of
the church. In either case, you should be eliminated from
further respect, and confidence, by sane, sensible, thinking
men, who hold a high regard for logical, human development
toward a perfected civilization, with a final purpose of equal
izing all men in a state of justice, intelligence, and human
comforts and happiness.
Our declaration of independence declares this to be the
purpose of this nation.
In other chapters we have exposed endless evidences of
deceit, hypocrisy, and false pretense, in the promotion of the
christian scheme to permanently fasten itself upon mankind.
We shall now uncover the fraud perpetrated upon hu
manity in the introduction of the Bible, with its two parts,
the old testament and the new.
The origin of the old testament was in the louse-ridden,
filthy dens of so-called monks, and was intended as a romantic
play.
The Last Word 145
To put it in practical use, as a modern institution in fact,
necessitated the writing of the so-called new testament, to
eliminate the Jews, who, as portrayed in the first story, never
existed.
It requires but a limited number of the Biblical charac
ters to prove our statements.
It is by its own secret ecclesiastical code we convict it
of wilful misrepresentation.
Fire-worship, sun-worship, and light-worship, are the
three elemental types in the old testament.
The positive evidence of false-pretense, revealed by its
secret code of symbolisms, figures, and bold personifications,,
brings the scheme down to man-worship, under the new testa
ment.
In the old testament, the true beginning of the church
is in Abraham, "who is the father of us all" (Rom. 4:16)
and "The father of Jesus Christ" (Matt. 1:1).
Thus, in the beginning of the new testament, this fabu
lous character is named the father of the head of the chris
tian church. It is therefore important to identify this Abraham.
It is essential to repeat some previous references to this
fabulous character.
He was first named Abram, which had to be corrected,
for the name only signified a high-priest, whereas the char
acter had to assume to be the father or high-priest of all.
The simplicity of this foolish play is pathetic.
Ab-ram came out of ur, meaning fire, hence he was the
priest of fire-worship.
His first born is Isaac, meaning light, joy, prosperity,
intellect.
This made the light of fire the first Christ.
To mend this error, God commanded Abram to sacrifice
his son Isaac on an altar of fire.
This had especial reference to the suppression of the wis
dom of the confiscated gnosticism.
They found it was impossible to suppress the gnostic wis
dom by burning of its records, therefore God provided a "ram"
146 The Last Word
to be thus sacrificed, and Ab-ram became Ab-ra-ham, which
eliminated the ram and substituted ham.
Ab means high-priest.
Ra means the sun.
Ham means hot.
High-priest of the hot sun.
Thus fire-worship was changed into sun-worship.
The sun made a much more universal and stable God.
Isaac, the son of Abraham, becomes the light of sun-
worship, and the Christ.
There is an effort made to identify Jesus as this Christ.
Jesus declares he is the "light of the world."
They couple the names in the first verse in the new testa
ment as Jesus Christ the son of Abraham (Matt. 1:1).
Then they sacrifice and crucify the gnostic light, Jesus.
This is most significant, for Joshua is the Jesus of the
old testament, Jesus being but the Greek form of the name
Joshua.
This alleged sacrifice was the withholding of education
and enlightenment from the producing classes.
There is a clear difference between this Jesus and the
name Christ.
Christ means authority.
Joshua means increased wealth.
Jo = increased, shua = wealth.
Jesus means sustenance, support.
Je = ever-existent, sus = sustenance.
This is further confused by the following:
"David is the father of Jesus Christ" (Matt. 1:1).
"Of this man's (David's) seed hath God according to
his promise raised unto Israel a savior, Jesus Christ" (Acts
13:23).
This brings Israeal over into the new testament with no
uncertain purpose, making it important to step back to Abra
ham's time to learn something of the original Israel.
Abraham was the high-priest of sun-worship.
Isaac, his offspring, is the light of the sun.
The Last Word 147
Jacob is the son of Isaac.
Is = the light, a = first cause, ac = great.
Light the first great cause.
Ja = Jehovah, the ever-existent.
Cob = cobus, meaning insidious, treacherous, crafty.
Jacob means the supplanter, usurper by trickery.
Rebekah, Jacob's mother, means snare, trap.
Esau means earthy, producing mankind.
Jacob and Rebekah swindled his brother Esau out of his
inheritance, light, joy, prosperity, intelligence.
Yet God made a bargain with Jacob to become the priest
hood, God to receive ten percent of all Jacob's graft (Gen.
28). God rewarded Jacob by naming him Israel, meaning
the church of Christ.
And now, you fanatical supporters of the so-called chris-
tion church, are you worshiping fake Jewish gods, or fake
christian gods ?
The name Christ is not a proper name at all. It means
initiation into high office and given authority. The name
Christ is from the Greek kristos, the Hebrew messiah.
Jesus, in like manner, is but the Greek form of Joshua—•
the source of increased wealth, human production.
You try to name the true origin of this Jesus:
He is named the son of man.
He is named the son of God.
He is named the son of Abraham.
He is named the son of David.
He is named the son of Mary by the Holy Ghost.
Mary means rebellion.
Holy Ghost means the breath.
Don't hesistate —tell us who this character is.
Now let us scrutinize some of the other fabulous char
acters brought over from the old testament.
Aaron is brought over as the teacher, the parochial school.
Moses came over as a multitude of laws, Christ, authority.
Elijah comes over as Elias, meaning God is God.
Jacob comes over as the usurpative church of Christ.
148 The Last Word
Levi comes over as the tax collector Matthew, giving gifts
to God.
Miriam comes over as Mary, rebellion, the mother of
Jesus.
Israel is Jacob in disguise—the church of Christ.
And, after all, what are you asked to worship?
Is = the light.
Ra = of the sun. •, .
El = is the first cause of all.
Away back in Deuteronomy we find:
"The Lord thy God is a consuming fire" (Deut. 4:24).
In the new testament we find :
"Our God is a consuming fire" (Heb. 12:29).
"For the Lord God is a sun" (Ps. 84:11).
Therefore, all who are sincere in their church adherence
are but deceived sun-worshipers.
The sun rises each morning over the eastern horizon for
all human beings alike. Neither pope, priest nor prelate can
influence the distribution of its warmth and light in the slight
est degree. Yet, in the belief that they have such power and
influence the ignorant people maintain unknown thousands of
these false-pretenders in luxury and ease, while they them
selves hunger.
The churches have amassed billions in grand church
structures and elegant homes, for which they receive in re
turn not even thanks, but more often are roundly scolded for
not contributing more.
Now, go to your fat-jowled, pot-bellied priests, and your
smooth, soft-handed preachers, and demand that they refund
all the money you ever contributed to the church, on the ground
that it was obtained under false-pretenses.
Then demand of your legislative bodies to suppress this
awful burden upon credulous, struggling humanity.
The priesthood and church organization live, thrive and
fatten in idleness, upon human vanity, ignorance, and greed.
It cultivates evil and poverty for the fruits they yield. Every
thing they control which humanity requires it uses as a bribe.
The Last Word 149
"Buy the truth, and sell it not ; also wisdom and instruc
tion, and understanding" (Prov. 23:23).
In the code, tree symbolizes man, good or bad.
The following is eloquent of the methods employed by the
church to mulct humanity :
"Either make the tree (man) good, and his fruit good;
or else make the tree (man) corrupt, and his fruit corrupt ; for
the tree (man) is known by his fruit" (Matt. 12:33).
This advice to cultivate evil for the profits it yields has
created a horrible situation in the United States.
Crime is highly commercialized, yielding hundreds of mil
lions from taxes, penalties, and fines.
The people are literally smothered in so many criminal
laws the government cannot enumerate them, and the mills of
the legislative gods never cease grinding out new ones, know
ing, as they do, that each new criminal law creates a new
class of criminals to be mulct, and increases the expensive
machinery for the execution of the laws. The Bible advo
cates this.
"Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it
saith to them who are under the law; that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty" (Rom. 3 :19).
"Where no law is there is no transgression" (Rom. 4:15).
Before we close this warning to deceived humanity, we
must repeat the evidence of the purposeful intrusion of a fake,
so-called religious body, upon established human progression,
to seize control of the world, to enrich and glorify a design
ing priesthood, at the mental and physical expense of the strug
gling, slaving, producing masses of people.
This brief story is the essence of the whole Biblical church
scheme :
Isaac means light, joy, prosperity, intelligence, belonging
to all the people alike, the inheritance from nature to the
whole world.
Jacob means usurpation by treachery. He symbolizes the
priesthood, which seizes control of all access to enlightenment.
Rebekah means the protecting church, which sustains this
ISO The Last Word
usurpation —a snare, trap. Church is from chur, guardian
of the sun.
Esau means the producing masses of people, from whom
is confiscated all the natural sources of knowledge and en
lightenment, called light.
We shall now make clear, to all who desire to know the
truth, this treacherous conspiracy to rob greater humanity of
its natural rights, to be peddled back to it as a bribe to sup
port and maintain the church.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Esau and Rebekah are the essen
tial characters.
Not one of these ever existed in fact. They are but figura
tive personifications of the secret forces involved. We have
previously revealed the code significance of these names, out
of which is evolved Israel—the church of Christ.
Rebekah—snare, trap, instructed Jacob, the usurper, to
prepare the flesh of goats to imitate the venison of his elder
brother Esau, to be given to their blind father, Isaac, for food.
Goat means man.
Here, now, is positive evidence of criminal purpose and
intent, wholly in keeping with the training of the Israelites
in Egypt as thieves, by God himself.
"Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau,
and put them upon Jacob, her youngest son.
"And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his
hands and upon the smooth of his neck.
"And she gave the savory meat and the bread, which
she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
"And he came unto his father, and said, My father; and
he said, Here am I, who art thou, my son?
"And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first
born ; I have done according as thou badest me ; arise, I pray
thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
"And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? and he said,
I am" (Gen. 27).
Did God condemn Jacob and Rebekah for this treacher-
our, thieving act?
The Last Word 151
No, on the contrary, he bargained with Jacob to pay to
God ten percent of all his future graft, and, to express his
satisfaction, he declared to Jacob that his name should, in
future, be Israel, the church of Christ.
Thus, having usurped the light, joy, prosperity, and en
lightenment, which belonged to the people, in the name of the
church he was to peddle these to the people for a profit, ten
percent of which was to go to the head of the system.
This was the play as it was written in the old testament.
In the new testament, that other murderous skunk, and
blessed of God, David, is credited with giving to this Israel, the
church of Christ, a savior, Jesus Christ (Matt. 1:1).
Which also makes David the father of Joshua, for the
name Jesus is the Greek for Joshua, meaning increased wealth.
Christ is not a proper name, but is from kristos, the Greek
name of the messiah, meaning authority.
Now, while righteous indignation may start something,
this revelation will not be disputed by the present day chris
tian church, no matter what its political pull.
In view of this contemptible deceit, are you going to con
tinue to burden yourself with the support of this thing called
the church, which laughs at you, knowing there is not one
breath of true religion in the vicious scheme?
Are you going to permit bla ! bla ! priests to continue their
interference in the business, professional and educational du
ties of this nation to give to the church dictatorial powers ?
The freedom of speech guaranteed by the first article
of amendments to our constitution, which also repudiates leg
islation favoring the church, does not give a right to priests
to slander and criticise our national institutional practices.
The nosing into business affairs of the nation by the church
must be throttled. Political intrigues by the church must be
rudely exposed and condemned.
The church, and every antiquated form of moral educa
tion, hiding behind so-called religion, should be supressed.
The manufacture of crime by endless laws must cease,
152 The Last Word
and this nation of people must shake itself loose from the
influences of false-pretense and commercialized evil.
The floors of civil governments must be swept clean of
odoriferous intrigues and influences.
This we believe is sufficient to sweep the cobwebs out
of the minds of self-respecting, thinking persons who do not
practice with the church for the fruits it yields, good or evil.
We rest our work in a sincere belief that we have done
our duty toward our fellow men, especially those who have
been deprived of the opportunity of learning the truth.
If we are sent to hell for thus exposing these treacherous
things, the only regret will be that we must associate with
the fiends responsible for all human suffering, for
Hell means the grave.
It
if
It
1.
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
1 1 1i 1i minium
3 9015 06354 4194
