{"type":"link","mylink":"http:\/\/www.iapsop.com\/ssoc\/1926__mead___sacred_dance_in_christendom.pdf","mytitle":"Sacred Dance In Christendom","mylang":"de"}
Quarterly Review.
Edited by G. R. S. Mead.
Zfyt €tuedt lUprint Bettes.
No. II.
The Sacred Dance in Christendom.
i. The Sacred Dance of Jesus,
ii. Ceremonial Game-Playing and Dancing,
iii. Ceremonial Dances and Symbolic Banquets.
Bv T he Editor.
JOHN M. WATKINS,
21, Cecil Court, Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. 2.
Price 2s. 6d.; post free 2s. 8d.
ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALL] [*.LL
THE QUEST.
THE QUEST wcioomes contributions which exemplify the investigation and com­
parative study of religion, philosophy and science as complementary to ono another
in aiding tlio search for that reality which alone can givo complete satisfaction.
It desires to promote enquiry into the nature of religious and other supranormal
experiences and tho means of testing their valuo, to strengthen tho love of wisdom
which stimulates all c[Torts to formulate a practical philosophy of life, and to
emphasize tho need of a vital science to crown and comploto the discoveries of
physical research. It also invites contributions which treat of the purpose of
art and tho expression of the ideal in forms of beauty; and in lltorature interests
itseif in works of inspiration and of genial imagination.
A m o n g the contributors have been: A. E., Dr. J. Abolson, Douglas Ainslie, Alexis
Aladin, Dr. K. C. Anderson, Dr. H. J. D. Astley, Arthnr Avalon, Dr. Fr. Aveling, Sir
William F. Barrett-, Bichard do Bary, Dr. L. B. de Beaumont, Monsignor Robert Hugh
Benson, Dr. Edwyn Bevan, Laurence Binyon, Algernon Blackwood, Dr. Moyrick
Booth, Prof. Emile Boutroux, Cioudeslcy Brereton, Lucy E. Broadwood, A. Glutton
Brock, Dr. William Brown, Dr. Martin Buber, Pror. It. nnltiuann, Dr. Yacher
Burch, Prof. F. C. Burkitt, Dr, C. Dolisie Burns, L. Cranmcr Byng, Mona Caird, Prof.
A. Caldecott, Prof. Maurice A. Cannoy, Prof. J. Estlin Carpenter, Prof. H. Wlldon
Carr, Dr. W. F. OoikeCobb, Prof. A. A. Cook, F. C. Constable, Dr. F. C. Conybeare,
Dr. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Prof. S. N. Das Gupta, E. deques-Dalcroze, Dr. C. A. F.
Rhys Davids, Prof, nans Driesch, Millar Dunning, Dr. Robert Elsier, E. D. Fawcett,
R.Nowton Flow, Dr. E. E. Fournierd’Albo, Prof. Edmond G. Gardner, Dr. M. Caster,
Prof. W. R. Boyco Gibson, Dr. Lionel Giles, David Gow, Stephen Grnharn, Sir K. a .
Gupta, Dr. K. S. Guthrie, J. C. Hardwick, Prof. J. Rondel Harris, E. B. Havell, Baron
A. Heyking, .7. Arthur Hill, Provost Erskluo Hill, Dr. Geraldine E. Hodgson, Edmond
Holmes, Gustav T. Holst, Prof. S. Honaga, A. R. Horwood, Baron F. v. HUgel, Dr.
James H. Ilyslop, Sheykh Muhammcd Iqbal, Arvid Jurufelt. Prof. J. Javakhiahvill,
Prof. Karl Joe!, R. F. Johnston, Maud Joynt, Prof. Franz Hampers, E. E. Kollett,
W. F. Kirby, Prof. G. H. Langloy, Paul P. Lovcrtoff, Archdeacon A. L. Liiloy,
Morton Luco, Prof. W. Lutosiawski, Arthur Lynch, M. A. MacauliiTe, Dr. W. M.
McGovern, Arthur Machcn, Prof. J. S. Mackenzie, Fiona Maclood, Prof. A.
Marmorstoln, John MascileJd, Col, F. N. Mnude, Gustav Moyrink, Pol de Mont, Dr.
C. G. Montofloro, Count Arrigo Manza do’ Norl, Rosa Nowmarcli, Dr. Reynold A.
Nicholson, Prof. Yoshio Noda, Yon6 Noguchi, Alfred Noyes, Blandish O’Grady,
Moysheh Oyvod, Prof. E. H. Parker, Prof. L. do )a Vallee Poussin, Prof. S.
Radhakrlshnan, G. Ilanumantha Rao, Dr. Angolo H. Rappoport, Ernest Rhys,
Prof. P. Salntyves, Prof. Denis Saurat, Prof. Ernest Siopcr, Prof. William Benjamin
Smith, Stephen Sonthwold, Flora Annio Steel, M. Carta Sturge, Arthur Symons,
Rabindrannth Tagore, Prof. J. Arthur Thomson, Fathor Tyrrell, Evelyn Underhill.
Arthur Edward Waite, Sir William Watson, Dr. Jessie L. Weston, Dr. C. J. Whitby,
Joseph II. WIcksteed, Prof. A. G. Widgery, Prof. Wilhelm Wiudelband, W. B.
Yeats, Sir F. Yonnghusband, etc.
w THE SACRED DANCE IN CHRISTENDOM.
Contents. .
I. THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS.
The ‘To-morrow shall be my Dancing Day ’ Carol.—Not
a Folk-Song.—Symbolic Dancing in the ‘Paradiso ’ of
Dante and the Hoavonly Dance in the ‘Dieta Salutis.’
—Chambers’ Summnry of Dancing and Games in the
Churches.—The Basic Account of Mdnestrier.—Dance
Symbolism in the Church Fathers.—Eusebius and the
Dancing of the Therapeuts.—The Dance in the sO-callod
‘Hymn of Jesus.’—The Final Link with the Prototype
of the Carol.
II. CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING AND DANCING IN
MEDIAEVAL CHURCHES.
The Pelota Ball-Dance of Auxerre.—Its Suppression.—
The Pelota of Narbonne.—The Percula of Naples.—The
Testimony of Beleth and Durand.—The Bride Ball
Theory.—The Direction in which a Probable Solution
maybe Sought.—The Burial of Alleluia.—The Whipping
of Alleluia.—The Allelniatic Office.—The Exegesis of
Almar and of Cardinal Bona.—A Few Suggestions.I
I
I
.
I
V
.
III. CEREMONIAL DANCES AND SYMBOLIC BANQUETS
IN MEDIAEVAL CHURCHES.
The Bergeretta Dancing of Besancon.—The Dance at
Limoges.—An Attempted Reconstruction.—The Grolia
Banquet at Auxerre.—The Easter Meal at Narbonne.—
The Easter Repast of Nevers.—The Ascension Day
Collation of Toul.—The Easter Repasts at Besangon.—
The Papal Easter Banquet at Rome.—The Easter
Feast of St. Ulric.—The Probable Origin of the
Banquets.
IV. NOTE.
The Divine Dance according to Plotinus.
THE QUEST REPRINT SERIES.
EDITORIAL NOTE.
‘The Quest Reprint Series’ is designed to rescue articles of
exceptional interest from the oblivion of the back numbers of
the Review.
In the present number (No. II.) there are gathered together,
under the general title of 1The Sacred Dance in Christendom,’
three studies by myself, which were first published in Oct. 1910,
Oct. 1912 and Jan. 1918 respectively. The subject seemed and
still seems to mo to be more than ordinarily arresting, indeed
quite fascinating. I reprint them, because so far no ono else,
to my knowledge, has collected together the out-of-the-way material
which [follows. It demanded lengthy research in the by-ways of
not easily accessible literature. But the labour seemed well worth
while; for it unearthed rare information on high matters in
Christian symbolism, and disclosed a number of very curious
survivals in mediioval churches. The ropublication, moreover,
may perchance induce some one more competent than myself to
carry the task further. Meantime, lovers of the beautiful and
the quaint will, I hope, find some things in the following pages
to delight and entortain them.
Chelsea. Sept., 192G.
r
v
!
THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS.
G. R. S. M ead, B.A.
N one, therefore, of the things that they will say about me did I
suffer ; nay, even that Passion which I showed unto thee and to
the rest in the Dance, I will that it he called a mystery.—Acta
Ioannis, 101 (1C).
*
1. To-morrow shall he my dancing day;
I would my true love did so chance
To see the legend of my play,
To call my true love to my dance.
Sing, oh 1 my love, oh ! my love, my love, my love,
This have I done for my true love.
2. Then was I horn of a Virgin pure,
Of her I took fleshly substance;
Then was I knit to man’s nature,
To call my true love to my dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
8. In a manger laid and wrapp'd I was,
So very poor, this was my chance,
Betwixt an ox and a silly1poor ass,
To call my true love to my dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
4. Then afterwards baptized I was,
The Holy Ghost on me did glance,
My Father’s voice heard from above,
To call my true love to the dance.
Sing, oh ! etc.
1 Meaning ‘simple.’
45
Oct. 1910.
46 THE QUEST
5. Into tha desert I was led,
Where I fasted without substance ;
The Devil bade me make stones my bread,
To have me break my true love’s dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
6. The Jews on mo they made great suit,
And with mo made great variance,
Because they lov’d darkness rather than light,1
To call my true love to the dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
7. For thirty pence Judas me sold,
His covetousness for to advance;
Mark when11 kiss, the same do hold,
The same is he shall lead the dance.
Sing, oh ! etc.
8. Before Pilate the Jews me brought,
When Barabbas had deliverance ;
They scourg’d me and set me at nought,
Judged me to die to lead the dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
9. Then on the cross liang6d I was;
Where a spear to my heart did glance,
There issued forth both water and blood,
To call my true love to the dance.
Sing, oh ! etc.
10. Then down to Hell I took my way
For my truo love’s deliverance,
And rose again on the third day
Up to my true love and the dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
11. Then up to Heavon I did ascend,
Where now I dwell in sure substanco
On the right hand of God, that man
May come unto the general dance.
Sing, oh! etc.
1 Better: 1For they lov’d darkness more than light.’
3 Presumably ' whom.'
THE SACRED DANCE OP JESUS 47
At first sight the words of this delightfully quaint
and perhaps unique Christmas carol will probably sur­
prise the majority of readers, and in some cases even
give a shock to their sense of propriety; indeed, at this
lato hour, when so much has been forgotten, the asso­
ciation of dancing in any shape or form with the sacred
person of Jesus cannot but appear to most puritanical
minds as little better than an outrage. The purpose of
this study, however, is to show that other days had
other views, other customs, other traditions ; that, in
fact, the idea of a sacred dance—a heavenly carol or
chorus—of utmost holiness goes back to the earliest
times of Christianity.
Our carol was still sung by the peasants in W.
Cornwall, when recorded by William Sandys,1 some
eighty years ago. Sandys apparently knew nothing of
its tradition or origin, and so far I have myself been
unable to obtain any information on its more immediate
ancestry.2
It is very evident that this carol cannot bo dis­
missed as a folk-creation pure and simple ; it bears all
the marks of a nobler genealogy. Apart from the ques­
tion of its origin proper, I would venture to conjecture
for the first stage of its descent into folk-form, the
intermediary of the medinoval minstrels, jongleurs,
troubadours, etc., who are indeed said to be the very
inventors of the name carolc? the thing itself being far
more ancient as we shall see later on. Now the Trou-
1 Christmas Carols, Ancient and Modem (London, 1833), pp. 110-112;
reprinted in his Christmaslidc, its History, Festivities and Carols (Loudon,
? 1852), pp. 200 ff.
3 Information has been asked for in Notes and Queries (Mar. 10, 1910),
in Folk-lore (xxi. i, Mar., 1910), and also in the last number of Tub Qubst,
but so far without result.
s Carole was “ the name given by tho Trouvtrcs to a dance in which the
performers moved slowly in a circle, singiug as they went."—Lilly Grove,
Dancing (London, 1895), p. 181.
48 THE QUEST
v6res, or Troubadours, we have good reason to believe,
adapted, and so preserved in popular form, many scraps
and fragments of old mystery-traditions still floating
about in the middle ages, the history of the descent and
the origin ofwhioh still baffles the ingenuity of scholars.1
The original meaning of carol is given by all the
authorities as a (? sacred) ‘ring-dance,’men and women
holding each others’hands; its derivation, though in
much dispute,3is most probably from the Greek chords,
and what that signified we shall see as we proceed.
Setting aside, for the moment, the denunciations
and prohibitions of disorderly lay dancing at the sacred
festivals and even in the divine offices, by fathers,
counoils and synods, from the post-Constantine period
onwards—that is, beginning about the middle of the
fourth century, we know that with the Renaissance the
idea of sacred dancing re-emerged in great strength, and
we find Dante making free use of it. In a recent lec­
ture Mr. Edmund G. Gardner has surmised that the
symbolical dancing in the Paradiso may have been
suggested by the Dieta Salutis (or Life of Salvation),
traditionally ascribed to S. Bonaventura, but to be
attributed with greater probability to another Francis­
can, Gulielmus de Lavicea or do Lanicia. In those
days, however, the links with the past were more
numerous than they are to-day, and it would be unwise
to lay too much stress on any particular of the frag­
mentary indications now accessible being the source of
Dante’s inspiration. Nevertheless the Dieta deserves
1 I have suggested a similar back-ground for the variants of the curious
carol1Over yonder’s a Park ' or ‘Down in yon Forest’; it seems to link up
by means of the Troubadours with the German cycle of Graal-literature, in
which the sacred hallow is the Stone of Alchemy, and this Stone “ that is
no stone,” was, as we are told by Zosimos, the Alchemist and Pcemandrist, at
the end of the fourth century, no other than the prime mystery of Mithras.
See the Folk-Song Society’s journal, iv. 14 (June, 1910).
* Soe Murray's Oxford Dictionary.
TF-Fj sa c r e d DANCE OP JESUS 49
to be quoted, for it marks out the bed of one of the
streamlets of that great river of mystical tradition which
watered the plains of mediaeval theology, and which was
incorrectly labelled with the pseudonym ‘Dionysius the
Aveopagite.’ The Renaissance brought back to the
West more than the memory of secular classical learn­
ing ; it also awoke in the Occidental Church the
reminiscence of some sacred things that had long been
forgotten.
In its last chapter,1the Dicta Salutis treats *Of the
Joys of Paradise,’ and describes “ the most delightful
company abiding there, in celestial glory, in the Divine
Presence.” This ‘amantissima socictas ’ is charac­
terised as (1) a company too vast to number, (2) in
endless circling (i.c. dancing in rhythmic revolution
with the heavenly spheres), and (3) singing a ceaseless
song of praise too glorious for mortal comparison.
“ Blessed in sooth is that danco (chorea), whose com­
pany is infinity, whose circling is eternity, whose song
is bliss.”
Firstly, in that celestial dance we must think of a company,
an army infinite,—that is to say, known not to us but unto God
alone. For there is Christ the King,—as though solo sovereign
excollont, and august Cresar. There also is the Queen with all her
maidens,—Virgin of virgins, Mary with all her saintly maids.
The Angels too are tliore,—as highest nobles of the Kingly house.
There are the Patriarchs and there the Prophets,—as though
ranked next the Angels, and Counsellors of the King, to whom as
elders of a cabinet not privy to Him, He doth reveal His ministry.
There also the Apostles,—as the King's seneschals, store-keepers
of the plenitude of piety. The Martyrs too are there,—as the most
active warriors of the King. There also are the holy PontilTs, and
Confessors and the Doctors.
And, secondly, in that celestial dance we must think of a
1 Cap. 1. The latest edition accessible to me of this Golden Booldct
(Aureus Libelhtt), as the sub-title names it, was printed at Venice, in 1018;
see if. cxv. IT
.
C
O THE QUEST
circling without end. For ever will there bo among the Blest an
entering in, a going forth and a return,—an entering in to contem­
plate His godhood, a going forth to see the various phases of our
Saviour’s manhood. . . . And as in other dances there is one
who leadeth the whole dance, so doth the Christ [this sacred
circling] ; 'tis Ho who will be leader of the dance, leading that
company most blessed and preceding it. . . .
Thirdly, in that celestial danco we must think of a wondrous
ceaseless song. And therefore mark, that as Christ leads in dance
(ijressu), so doth He lead in song. And first of all unto His Virgin
Mother will Ho sing, etc.
Christ, the Chorus-loader, the Tenth or Perfect
Number, sings to all nine choirs in turn, and they sing
back to Him their chants of praise in antiphon.
Whence came this tradition of the Christ’s most sacred
dance? Before wo can answer the question, we must
review briefly the attitude of the post-Constantine
official Church to dancing, and point out that in the
very denunciations and prohibitions of Pagan dancing
and of dancing-abuses among the Christians themselves
at sacred festivals and in the sacred buildings, by later
fathers, councils and synods, there was ever the recog­
nition of a spiritual danco, led by the Saviour and
shared in by archangels and angels and powers, and all
the companies of saints, while some of the early fathers
bear direct testimony to institutional rites connected
with this mystery. To show the need of a more
thorough-going treatment of the subject, however, we
will preface this review with the following inadequate
and (as to early history) misleading summary of
Chambers,1as the best so far available.
1 Chambers (E. K.), The Medieval Stage (Oxford, 1903), i. 161 f. Mrs.
Lilly Grove is nearor fact iu tho first part of her statement, but mistaken in
the last part of it, when she writes (op. cit. p. 8): “ In tho first centuries of
our era the Church allowed dancing within tho sacred walls; then came a
period of degradation of tho art, till it found its ronaissanco in Italy iu the
sixteenth century. Thence it was introduced to the French court by
Catherine do' Medici."
THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS 51
The dance had been from the beginning a subject of contro­
versy between Christianity and the Roman w o r l d b u t whereas
the dances of the East and South, so obnoxious to the Early
Fathers, were mainly those of professional entertainers, upon the
stage or at banquets, the missionaries of the "West had to face the
even more difficult problem of a folk-dance and a folk-song which
were among the most inveterate habits of the freshly converted
peoples. As the old worship vanished, these tended to attach
themselves to the new. Upon great feasts and wake-days, choruses
of women invaded with wanton cantica and ballationea the pre­
cincts of the churches and even the sacred buildings themselves,
a desecration against which generation after generation of eccle­
siastical authorities were fain to protest.’ . . . The struggle
was a long one, and in the end the Church never quite succeeded
even in expelling the dance from its doors. The chapter of Wells
about 1838 forbade chorea and other lucli within the cathedral
and cloisters. . . . A seventeenth century French writer [sci.
Mdnestrier] records that he had seen clergy and singing boys
dancing at Easter in the churches of Paris, and other astounding
survivals.' At Seville, as is well known, the six boys, called los
Seises, dance with castanets before the Holy Sacrament in the
presence of the Archbishop at Shrovetide, and during the feasts of
the Immaculate Conception and Corpus Christi. At Echternach,
in Luxembourg, thoro is an annual dance through the church of
pilgrims to the shrine of St. Willibrord,* while at Barjols, in
Provenco, a ‘triple dance ’ is danced at Mass on St. Marcel’s day.
1 A very imperfect list of patristic references is appended.
J Tliero follows a well-referenced note on the decrees of councils and
synods against these abuses, which may, however, bo supplemented by
Bohmo (F. M.), Gcschichte ties Tanges in Deutschland (Leipzig, 1888), i. 15 ft.
s Cp. the anonymous writer of Le Livre do Philon, do la Vie contem­
plative (Paris, 1709): “ The dance is not forbidden in itself; it is only the
bad uso that has frequently been made of it,” which has brought it into
disrepute. “ The Jews and early Jiuheo-Christians . . . regurdod it as
authorised by tho greatest Saints of the Old Testament" (p. 251). “ Indeed
wo seo that tho Roman Church, so careful to cxcludo from tho churches
everything unworthy of Christiau gravity and modesty, allows tho united
Armenians certain usages closely resembling those of tho ancient Melotians,
and that, too, in Romo under the very eyes of tho Pontiff. I saw these rites
myself" (p. 255). Then follows a description of them. As Meletius was
quite orthodox, tho reference must bo to the general custom of tho churches
(both Athanasian and Arian) at Antioch, of which Meletius was bishop; this
we shall see more clearly later on, p. 57.
4 Add to C.’s references hero 1Dancing in Churches,’ by Rev. John
Morris, in The Month (Dec., 1892), lxxvi. 342, pp. 493-518.
52 TOE QUEST
I have searched in vain through the literature of
the history of dancing,1for the proper patristic indica­
tions of liturgical dancing in the Early Church. "With­
out exception the historians of dancing base themselves,
in this particular, directly or indirectly, on the curious
work of the Jesuit Father Menestrier (Paris, 1082), who
was a great enthusiast for symbolical dancing, and
arranged a number of such ballets for the French court.
It will, therefore, be apropos to translate a few passages
from this rare and interesting work ; for P. Menestrier
states his views so categorically that they must have
been not only in keeping with the learned opinion of
his day, but also favourably regarded by his ecclesias­
tical superiors. His historical and archaeological
statements, however, can neither be used with confi­
dence nor dismissed with prejudice ; the whole subject
requires thorough revision. In his unpaged Preface
Menestrier writes:
The divine office was made up of psalms, hymns and canticles,
1 I append tho pertinent items of my bibliographical notes to savo
others from a liko fruitless search : Vuiller (G.), A History of Dancing
(Eug. Trans., London, 1903), ii. 46-19, ‘.Religions Dancing ’—copies 5Ienes-
trier; Benson (It. II.), Papers of a Pariah (Loudon, 1907), pp. 106-120, ‘On
tho Danco as a Religious Exercise ’—associates it with tho ceremony of tho
Mass, but gives no references; Lilly Grove, Dancing (London. 1895), p. 90—
copies M .; Desrat (G.), Dictionnatre <
ic la Danse (Paris, 1895)—follows >L,
thcro is a useful bibliography at end; Bohmo (F. 51.), Gcschiclitc des Tances
(Leipzig, 1886)—copies M,, contains a good bibliography ; Voss (R.), Dcr Tans
und seine Gcschiclitc (Berlin, 1869)—copies 51.; Czerwinski (A.), Gcschiclitc
dcr Tanzknnsl (Leipzig, 1862), pp. 33 ff., ‘Kirchontanzc ’—copies 51.;
Barth£lomy (C.), Bationat . . . . des Divins Offices de Guillaume Durand
(Paris, 1854), ii. 438-444, ‘La Danse au point de vuo Liturgiquo'—lifted
vorbally from Do Cahusao without acknowledgment; B. translated the
thirteenth century Bishop Durandus' Dc Divinis Officiis, and appended notes,
there is nothing in D. himself on liturgical dancing; Barou (A.), Lettres
. . . sur la Danse (Paris, 1824), pp. 19 f., ‘De la Danse rcligicuse chez les
Jnifs ot Ics Chrdtions' —draws on M.; Castil-Blaze, La Danse ct les Ballets
(Paris, 1832), cli. ii., 1Dansos des Chrf-tiens'—lifted from 51. with mistakes ;
De Calmsac (51.), La Danse ancicnnc ct modems (La Haye, 1754), i. 41 ff.
‘De la Danse Sacreo des Chretiens ’—copies 51.; 51enestricr (F. K.—S. J.),
Des Ballets anciens et modemes (Paris, 1682). Desrat says that .Menestrier
drew some of his material from Paradin (G.), Lc Blason des Danses (Bcaujeau,
1566—reprinted by Firmin-Didot in 1830); but there is, unfortunately, no
copy of this small work in the British Museum.
THE SACRED DANGE OF JESUS 53
for the praises of God were recited, sung and danced...................
The place where these religious acts were performed in divine
worship was called the choir,1 just as with the tragic and comic
chori of the Greeks. In Latin the prelates were called prassules,*
from precsilicndo, according to Scaliger, for in the choir, at the
divine office, they played the same part as the leader of the dances
in the public games, who was called by the Greeks choragus.8
In course of time, Father Menestrier continues,
owing to abuses these sacred dances, together with the
love-feasts and the custom of the kiss of peace, were
abolished. In the body of his treatise, he returns to
the name choir, which, he says (p. 12), still marks out
the place where “ our priests sing and perform their
ceremonies.” In ancient times, however, he continues,
the choir was separated from the altar, and raised up
so as to form a theatre, being enclosed on all sides by a
breast-high screen, and in.confirmation he points to the
ancient choirs of this form still to be seen in the
churches of SS. Clement and Pancras at Rome. I have
in vain searched the histories of ecclesiastical architec­
ture for further information; nothing at all seems to
be known of church-structure prior to the second half
1 From Gk. chords. The earliest meaning of chords in Homer is a closed
space for processional or circular dancing, later called orchestra (Reisch,
a rt.1Chor,' in Pauly-Wissova’s Rcal-Enc.); it was used at an early date for
the danco itself, for a band that danced and sang, and for poems so sung
(Castets, art. ‘ Chocur,' Darenberg and Saglio’s Diet, tics Anliqq.)-, the
Dithyrambic chori were cyclic, while tlio Tragic and Comic were square
(Stephanus, Thesaurus, s.v.); according to Suidas, chorda was dancing
accompanied with song, whereas orchesis was silent dancing (J. C. Suicerus,
Thesaurus Ecc., 2nd cd., Amsterdam, 1728, ii. 516). But in course of time
chords grew to mean auy company of people, or guild or fraternity, gathered
together for a religious or even a secular purpose; by the Church fathers it
was used for the angels, etc., for the disciples and the various orders of
Church dignitaries, and for monastic brotherhoods, etc.; while Eusebius
rhetorically transfers the ecclesiastical use to the various grades of the court
of the Emperor Constantine.
J The priests of the ancient Roman dancing guild of the Salii were so
called because they led the danco (prasHire) in public.
3 This should be coryphceus; choreyos was the patron or manager who
undertook the cost of the chorus.
64 THE QUEST
of the fourth century, when, after the ‘cfesarising ’ of
the Church by Constantine, the Pagan temples began
to be destroyed and magnificent Christian structures
replaced them. That, however, there was some con­
nection between the plans of church and theatre is
indubitable; for the custom of the Early Church was
loudly to applaud the preacher as at the play, while our
English *parson ’ is nothing but the Latin persona
(a *mask,’ hence ‘actor ’), and our ‘pulpit ’is the Latin
pulpitum (or ‘stage ’).
If now we turn to the indications in the fathers,
working backwards (and reserving to the end the
important testimony of Eusebius, the enthusiastic
singer of the praise of Constantine and the father of
church history), we find that the patristic denunciations
of irregular dancing break out in a flood precisely about
the same critical period, the second half of the fourth
century.
Theodoret (c. 390 — ? 455), writing of the angels,
says that they are immortal incorporeal beings, whose
nature transcends sex; their work is “ dancing in heaven
and hymuody of their Creator.”1 Here the distinction
between dancing (chorda) and singing is clearly drawn.
So also, in writing of the martyrs, he advises his readers
to follow them, that they may share in “ their dance in
the indestructible teons ” ;2 for unto them that believe
hath been promised “ the kingdom of the heavens, and
life that hath no end, and light intelligible, and to dance
in company with those free of all body.”3 Elsewhere
speaking of Paul (“ I know a man,” etc.), Theodoret con­
tinues, “ for he had seen the beauty of Paradise, and
the dances of the holy ones therein, and the voice of
1 Grcec. Affect. Cur. iii. (‘Do Ang.’), Migne, iv. 892 u.
*lb. iv. (‘De Mart’) ; M. iv. 1033 b. *lb. si. (‘De Fine ’
); M. iv. 1121 c.
THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS 55
their hymnody and perfect harmony ’’j1 and referring
to the Song of the Blessed Children (“ Bencdicite . .
angeli Domini Domino ”) in Daniel, he says that “ they
summon to the dance both heaven, and the waters
above the heavens, and the powers that circle round the
divine throne”;3 not only so, but the flames of the
burning fiery furnace were turned into dew, “ so that
those Blessed Children danced the dance in their
midst, and sang the hymn.”3 The sacred dance is a
dance of the virtues in harmony with the powers above;
and so Theodoret tells us of Pelagius, that he caused
Continence and her sister-virtues to stand up in him
and danced with them.4 In general it may be said that
the idea of the sacred dance dominated Theodoret’s
thought and strongly influenced his vocabulary; he
speaks of the chorcia of the stars and of the seasons, of
the clioroi of the disciples, apostles, patriarchs, pro­
phets and martyrs, and of the ecclesiastical grades,
while in treating of the ascetic life he frequently uses
chords as the technical term for the body of brethren of
a monastic order. His most striking phrase is the
‘genoral dance,’5of which our carol (11, 4) is curiously
reminiscent.
On the other hand, Augustine (354—430) is more
intent on inveighing against “ frivolous and unseemly "
dances, on the supression of which, he tells us, all
bishops were agreed,0than in informing us what kind
of dancing was permissible. He does not, however,
object to dancing at the sacred festivals altogether, but
to the “ wauton and unseemly songs (cantica) . . .
1 Int. II. Ep. ad Cor. xii.; M. iii. 448 d. 5 In. Pt's. Dan. iii. 57 ; M. ii. 1357.
s Int. Jonce Projih. Arg.; M. ii. 1721. * Ecc. Hitt. iv. 12; M. iii. 1148 b.
5 Scrm. in S. Io. Chrijs. Procem. (Auct. ex Phot. Bib. 273); M. iv. The
general references will be found in the index to Migne.
4 C. Ep. Parm. iii. 6 ; M. ix. 107.
5(j THE QUEST
and dances (ballationcs and saltationes) ” before the
very doors of the church; these are all Pagan customs, he
avers.1 Not only so, but the same abuses had crept into
the ceremonies held at the tombs of the martyrs ; the
greatest scandals had occurred at the tomb of S. Cyprian
(t 258), on whose feast-day singing and dancing were
kept up the whole night. Augustine’s is the spirit of a
reformer and not of an historian; and so we find the
traditionalists supported the custom by quoting against
him the saying of the Lord (Mattli. xi. 11=Lit. vii. 27):
“ We have piped unto you and ye have not danced,”
which most of the reforming fathers are at great pains
to interpret in a more spiritual sense. Thus Augustine
avers that “ the piper is the teacher; the dancer he who
carries out what is taught ” ; that Cyprian heard Christ
“ piping, and let himself be seen as dancing not with
his body, but with his mind.”2
Chrysostom (c. 347—407) chiefly inveighs against
disorderly dancing and singing at marriages ; marriage
is a sacred mystery, he says, the type of a still greater
mystery of supreme love, as Paul declares (Ephes.v. 32):
“ The mystery is great: but I. speak in regard of Christ
and the Church.”3 There was, however a holy dance
and song. In the church at Antioch, he tells us, there
was a sacred all-night festival, a cliorostasia, in imita­
tion of the angelic dance and ceaseless hymnody of the
Creator. “ Above, the angelic hosts sing hymns of
praise ; below, in the churches, men in-choired faithfully
mimic them with the very same praise-service. Above,
the Seraphim chant forth the hymn Trisagion; below,
the mortal crowd re-echo it above. Of those in heaven
1 Ser. cclxv. 4 ; M. v. 2239.
3 Serm. cccxi. vi. 6 (iii. ‘In Nat. Cyp. Mart.’) ; M. v. 1416.
8 Cap. iv. Horn. xii. (‘In Ep. ad Coloss.’) ; 51. xi. 387; cp. also Horn. xx.
(‘In Ep. ad Ephes.’ v.); 51. xi. 145.
THE SACRED DANCE OP JESUS 67
and those upon the earth a unison is made,—one
general assembly, one single service of thanksgiving, one
single transport of rejoicing, one joyous dance.”1 But
there was much excess and abuses of a revivalistio
nature; even at the holy eucharist the faithful still
gesticulated with their hands, danced with their feet,
flung the whole body about, and spoke with tongues
(glossolaly), so that Chrysostom upbraids them with
introducing the manners of mimes and dancers at the
holy table itself.3 This must have been the custom of
the church of Antioch from the very beginning, the
tradition being kept up unbroken in the face of Paul’s
admonitions ; Chrysostom was apparently the first to
endeavour to reform it. There evidently was much
heart-burning over the question, for the traditionalists
quoted against the reformers, Ps. lxv. 1 (“ Send forth
cries of joy to the Lord, all the earth!”), where the
first word of the LXX. translation is cilaldxatc, and was
evidently used by the traditionalists (through the word­
play d-lalos) to support their glosso-lalia. Chrysostom
replies that he does not prohibit sensible words and
decent gestures, but meaningless cries and unseemly
motions ;3 while elsewhere at great length he explains
that it was David who first established the chanting of
psalms with music, dancing and singing.4 He points to
the church-pictures which represent David “surrounded
with his chori of prophets, who in manifold modes and
figures represent the passion and resurrection of the
Saviour’s humanity. . . . These are the cliori of
the prophets led by David, with divers instruments sing-
1 In illud, vidi Dom. Horn. i. 1; 31. vi. 1. 07; for choroitasia as a
service of dance, cp. Basil, i. 76 c. (B. ed.).
3 16. 2; M. 99. 3 16. 8 ; M. 101.
4 Procem. in Pss.; 31. v. 582 f.; it is, however, somewhat doubtful
whether C. wrote this interesting treatise.
58 THE QUEST
ing and playing and dancing to the glory of God, the cl.
psalms inspired by the Holy Spirit.” Addressing the
churches of Antioch, in another treatise, Chrysostom
contrasts their mode of keeping the New Year’s spiritual
festival with what he calls the Pagan feast of Satan;
they, the Christians, he says, had spent the best part of
the day “ drunk with a drunkenness replete with conti­
nence, dancing with Paul."1 They had danced spiritual
dances in decent order, had shared in the cup over­
flowing with spiritual doctrine, and made themselves
pipes and harps for the Holy Spirit to play on.2 This
can hardly be simple rhetoric, seeing how he elsewhere
upbraids the Christians for excess in these matters, but
rather points to an attempt to regulate what had
become disorderly; and so, in yet another attack on
Pagan dancing, Chrysostom says that God has not given
us feet for such dancing, “ but that we may dance with
the angels.”3
Equally so the reformor Ambrose (bishop, 374—397)
warns his flock at Milan against adopting the general
interpretation of the saying “ We have piped unto
you ” ; the saying is common, but not so the mystery.
The dancing desired of the Lord is the dance of David
before the Ark. Dancing should not be the companion
of ‘delight ’ but of ‘grace.'4 Again, Gregory of Nyssa
(c. 325—395) has precisely the same interpretation of
this saying, and the same reference to David; dancing
signifies “ intense joy,” and David “ by the rhythmic
motions of his body thus showed in public his inner
1 A number of Hayings of Paul as to 1running,’ etc., wore used by the
traditionalists in support of liturgical dancing; cp. Bbhtue, op. cit. p. 15.
* lit mm, in Lazar, i.; M. i. 963. 3 In Malili. Horn, xiviii. 3; M. vii. 491.
1 De Pcenit. ii. 6; M. 508; cp. p. 66 below concerning 1Grace' in the
1Hymn of Jesus.’
THE SACRED DANCE OP JESUS 69
state of soul.”1 So also Gregory of Nazianzen tells us
that the dance is a mystery; the dance of David before
the ark, he thinks, typifies the dancing of “ that swift
course of revolution manifold ordained by God.”2 And
lastly Basil, of the reformers, bids a fallen virgin
remember the “ angelic dance round God, the spiritual
life in the flesh, and the celestial constitution on
earth ” ;8 he also refers to the saying “ We have piped
unto you,” and tells us that every sacred prophet is
symbolically called a ‘pipe,’ because of the inspiration
of the Holy Spirit; the words of the prophets “ induce
in us the rhythmic working of holy prophecy, which is
called dancing.”1
Such are the indications of what wo may call the
reform-movement of the fathers of the fourth century.
Turning now to the third century, we find Gregory
Thauraaturgus (c. 233—270) declaring on the Feast of
the Annunciation: “ To-day Adam is renewed and
dances with the angels, soaring to heaven ” ; and again :
“ The Kingdom above hastens to call the heavenly
minded to join the divine liturgy of the incorporeal
choirs ”—where the cliori must refer to dancing. For
he speaks of Eve, the first virgin, dancing alone in
Paradise before the logos of the Serpent, the Origin of
evil, entered into her; and of the babe leaping in the
womb of Elizabeth (Lk. i. 40, 41) as a symbol of the
wonder of the dance.5 He further puts in the mouth
of John the Baptist the following address to the
Jordan : “ Dance with me Jordan river, and leap with
me, and set thy waves in rhythm; for thy Maker has
come to thee in body. Once didst thou behold Israel
1 In Eccles. Horn. vi. 4 ; M. i. 709 c. 3 Or. v. (‘C. Jul.' ii.); 31. i. 309 F.
5 Ep. xlvi. 2 ; M. iv. 372. ‘ Horn, iu Ps. xxix.; M. i. 321.
8 Horn. i. (‘ In Ann. S . V. 31.’), M. x. 1145, 48 a, d , and ii., 31. 1165 a.
60 THE QUEST
passing through thee, and thou didst divide thy
waves and didst stand waiting till the people passed.”1
In the same century, Origen (c. 185—? 254), in his
criticism of Celsus, says that the Christians sing hymns
to God and His Alone-begotten as do “ sun and moon
and planets,” and the whole heavenly host. This
divine chords sings praise together with the righteous
on earth ;1
2 the chorostates of the Christians is Christ,
“ who sways his whole world with the word of his
teaching.”3 That this chords refers to dancing as well
as singing is clear from his second reference to the
“ sun and moon and choir of stars ” ;4
*while elsewhere
Origen prays above all things that we may have made
active in us that sublime power—namely, the mystery
“ of the stars dancing in heaven for the salvation
of the universe."6 Moreover, Origen interprets the
dancing of the daughter of Herodias allegorically,
as the dance of that evil opinion which dances
with the world of generation and pleases its ruler
(Ilerod), and so kills the prophetical life, that holy
dance referred to in the saying: “ We have piped unto
you.”6
The same language is also used by Clement of
Alexandria (c. 155—?211), Origen's teacher, when he
writes: “ For that which is still blind and dumb, that
is without understanding and the fearless piercing
vision of the soul that joys in contemplation, that
vision which the Saviour alone imparts,—just as those
who have not yet been initiated in the mysteries or
1 Horn. iv. (‘De Christi Bapt.’) ; M. x. 1134 c; cp. tho danco of the
Tlierapeuts in memory of the passage of the Red Sea, below p. 63.
* C. Cels. viii. 67 (Kcetschau, ii. 283). 3 lb. v. 33 (K. ii. 86).
4 In Mart. xii. (Ii. i. 13). 3 De Free. vii. 6 (K. ii. 816).
• Com. in Matth. x. 22; M. iii. 893 b.
THE SACRED DANCE OP JESUS G
1
have no taste for dance and song,—so that which is
not purged as yet, nor worthy of pure truth, but is
still dissonant, unrhythmical and material, must
still stand out from the divine chords."1 This
“ spiritual and holy chords is the Church symbolised
as [the Holy] Body.”2
Finally, I am persuaded by the cumulative evidence
of the above patristic passages, that what von Renesse
calls “ the most obscure passage ” of that early (? second
century) document The Didachd in all probability refers
to the ‘dancing ’ of the prophets, that order which
ranked so high in early Christian circles but which was
subsequently suppressed as individual inspiration and
liberty declined. It runs as follows :
“ Every prophet once approved as genuine, if he
act according to the cosmic mystery of the Church, and
refrain from teaching [others] to do what he does,
shall not be judged by you; for he has God as
judge. For in like fashion also the ancient prophets
acted.”3
But the most important evidence in favour of
sacred dancing as a traditional institution in the early
church, is that of Eusebius (c. 2G0 — ? 339); for the
father of church-history squarely affirms that Philo’s
description of the Therapeuts agrees in all points with
Christian customs, so much so that he claims the
Tlierapeuts as the earliest Christian church in Egypt.
If the received date of Jesus is approximately correct,
this is of course historically impossible, for Philo’s
treatise On the Contemplative Life was written about
26 a .d . ; the true historical importance, however, and
too much stress cannot be laid upon it, is that what
1 Strom. V. iv. 19 (Dind. iii. 17). * II. VII. xiv. 87 (D. iii. 328).
• Did. xi. 11 (Harnack, pp. 44f,).
62 THE QUEST
Eusebius knew at first hand and by tradition of the
customs of the Church, agreed in all respects with
Therapeut institutions. For we find him asserting
that, in Philo’s description, “ are most manifestly
(
<
eviclentissime) embraced all the institutions of the
Church, both as then traditionally established and also
preserved to the present day ” Philo, he tells us,
moreover enumerates “many other-things [besides their
manner of using scripture] which are practised by us
either in our churches or in our monasteries ” (§14), so
that there can be no doubt on the matter even among
the most sceptical (§ 17); even the solemnity of the
great all-night festival is precisely the same as that of
the Church (§ 21); in fine, Philo has woven into his
description the beginnings of Church institutions and
the original form of the apostolic and evangelical
tradition (§ 23).
But if Eusebius, who was on the spot, and who had
first-hand knowledge of the rites, ceremonies, customs
and traditions of many of the churches and monastic
foundations, could sec no difference, it is hardly com­
petent for us at this late hour to say ho was utterly
mistaken, solely to clear the field for what are no better
than 1preposterous ’theories of Early Church history
dictated by present-day theological exigencies. Euse­
bius is clearly wrong in calling the Therapeuts Chris­
tians, but not wrong in his knowledge of still living
Church-customs and traditions of his day. Now, as we
have seen, the first historian of the Church refers
especially to the oustom of the all-night festival, and
tells us that the observances of the Therapeuts on this
occasion and of the Church as known in his own day
and as tradition had handed them down, were identical.
1 Ecc. Hist. H. xvii. 1 (Schwartz, H. i. 140ff.).
THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS 63
In making this statement Eusebius had the following
passage1of Philo before him :
“ After tho banquet they keep the sacred all-night
festival. And this is how they keep it. They all stand
up in a body, and in the middle of the banqueting-place
they first form two choroi, one of mon and the other of
women, and a leader and conductor is chosen for each,
the one whose reputation is greatest for a knowledge of
music; they then chant hymns composed in God’s
honour in many metres and melodies, sometimes sing­
ing together, sometimes one chords beating the measure
with their hands for the antiphonal chanting of the
other, now dancing to tho measure and now inspiring
it, at times dancing in procession, at times set-dances,
and then circle-dances right and left.”2
Philo, ever ready to authenticate a custom by a
scriptural quotation, says that this festal dance was
a memorial of the spontaneous dance of triumph of the
Israelites after the miraculous passage through the Red
Sea, “ when both men and women together rapt in
divine ecstasy, forming one chords, sang hymns of joy­
ful thanks to God the Saviour, Moses the prophet
leading the men, and Miriam the prophetess the
women.”8
I am myself convinced that for the history of the
introduction of the tradition of the sacred dance, as of
so much else, into early Christian customs and
1 D. V. C. x i.; P. 902, M. 484; Conybeare (Oxford, 1895), pp. 127 ff. It
is to bo noted that it was Conybeare’s magnificent critical edition of this
treatise which gave the death-blow to the Griitz-Nicolas-Lucius Pseudo-
Philo theory.
5 These are all technical terms for the dances of the dramatic chorus.
5 Conybeare, in his convincing lealimonia, quotes many passages from
the rest of the Pliiloncan tractates, which prove unquestionably that the
contemplative circles with which our religio-philosopher was in contact,
were thoroughly imbued with tho idoa of a sacred dance. It is to be noted
further that for Philo (V.M. 2,172) Moses stood for the ‘perfect mind ' and
Miriam for the 1purified sense.'
G
4 THE QUEST
theology, the writings of Philo are a priceless source,
and that all attempts to treat of the origins of
Christianity which ignore the tractates of this great
Alexandrian Jewish exegete and historian, are doomed
to failure. If the received date of the origins of Chris­
tianity is right, Eusebius, the first church-historian,
was thus very wrong in claiming the Therapeuts as the
first Christian church of Alexandria, but he was not
wrong in finding in the Therapeut community of Philo
a prototype of many a custom of the Church ; while
as to the sacred dance itself Eusebius’ own language
abounds with references to it.1
We have now sufficiently disposed of the objection
that the Early Church used such phraseology in a
purely figurative and metaphorical sense. The Early
Church was taught as much by ‘prophetical ’ practice
and by ceremony, as by exhortation, philosophising and
moralising. The direct evidence of such ceremony is
now almost entirely lost, but kind fortune has quite
recently placed in our hands a priceless fragment of
the early achives in tho so-called ‘ Hymn of Jesus,’
incorporated with the Leucian (second century)
collection of tho Acts of John?
In his letter to the 'Spanish Bishop Cerotius,
Augustine, who so relentlessly persecuted the Priscil-
lianists and destroyed their scriptures, says that this
*Hymn ’ was widely used by maxxy of the heretical
sohools, besides the followers of Priscillian, that is to
1 Seo tho index in Ileikel’s ed. (Borlin, 1902), under chorcia, cliore&u and
chorus. Sometimes the use is metaphorical signifying a band, company or
assembly, but there arc frequent references to the dance of the stars, while
in V.C. II. xix. (H. 49, 3) we are told that “ dances and hymns taught them
of God the sovereign supreme."
’ For an introduction, commentary and notes, see the writer's Hymn of
Jesus (Echoes from the Gnosis, vol. iv., London, 1907), and for tho text,
Bonnet (M.), Acta Apost. Apoc. (Leipzig, 1898), II. ii. 197 f. (§§ 94-97). The
text is very corrupt.
THE SACRED 'DANCE OF JESUS 65
say by those who did not come up to Augustine’s
standard of orthodoxy. I have carefully analysed this
marvellous ‘Hymn,’ and have shown that it is no
hymn, but an ancient mystery-ritual of Early Christen­
dom, indeed by far the earliest Christian ritual with
which we are acquainted. It is nothing else but the
sacred dance of the unio mystica, wherein the new­
born disciple is united with the Master, the repentant
and purified human nature with the Divine Presence,
in the mystery of spiritual at-one-ment. The intro­
ductory narrative in the Acta, is put in the mouth of
John, who tells us that Jesus gathered the band of
disciples together before going forth to His betrayal,
and sang this last hymn with them.
“ Then bidding us mako as it were a ring, by
holding each othor’s hands, with Him in the midst, He
said: Answer ‘Amen ’ to Me. Then He began to
hymn a hymn.”
This is of course historically a pious subterfuge
to authenticate for the people the inner mystery of the
spiritually elect. Throughout the whole ceremony the
chords of the twelve slowly circle round in the sacred
dance, thus cutting off the sacred place, the holy
ground, from the turmoil of the world; within this
mystic circle the holy office proceeds; at each declara­
tion and each response (amcebrean and antiphonal) of
the 'neophytes, or new-born (personifying the Sophia),
and of the hierophantes or initiator (representing the
Christ), within the circle, the chords of the twelve
intones the sacred word ‘Amen.’
After the preliminary test-declarations, to show
that the candidate is fitly prepared, and the comforting
answers of the Saviour, the mystery passes into a
deeper stage, and takes on an intenser mode, for in the
G
O THE QUEST
rubric we now read that “ Grace danceth.” *Grace,’we
learn from the liturgy is the Ogdoad,—the technical
Gnostio term for the Sophia or Wisdom Above, the
Virgin of Light, Pure Nature; she therefore personifies
the Music of the Spheres, the One and the Seven.
Whereon the Master sings: “ I would pipe; dance
ye all. (Amen!) I would play a dirge; lament ye all.
(Amen I).”1
The 1cosmic mystery ’ begins to inspiro the human
dancers and singers.
“ The Ogdoad harps with us as one harp. (Amen!)
The Dodecad above doth dance [with us]. (Amen!)
The Whole on high is a-dance. Who danceth not
knows not what is being done. (Amen!)”
There follows a second set of mystic antiphonal
declarations of the Sophia and the Christ. So far the
candidate has stood motionless, but now he is bidden
to answer to the dancing of the representative of the
Master, the Logos, the Leader of the Divine Chorus.
“ Now answer to My dancing. See thyself in Me
who speak, and dancing what I do, keep silence on My
mysteries ; for thino is the Passion of Man that I am
to suffer.”
Then follows the mystery-dance of this Passion,
the earliest Passion-play of Christendom. Tho neo­
phyte is overwhelmed with the seeming horror of it,
the setting at naught, apparently, of the sacred person
of the Man of Sorrows; he loses courage, and is
assured he cannot understand the real joy of it until he
is finally perfected.
“ If thou hadst known how to suffer, thou wouldst
1 Cp. Matth. xi. \7=Lk. vii. 27. How this ‘ dark saying’ haunted the
memory of the Church we have already seen; surely it must have been the
echo of an ancient sacred drumenon or mystery-act ?
THE SACRED DANCE OF JESUS 67
have had power not to suffer. Be content to suffer,
and thou shalt not have to suffer. That which thou
knowest not, I myself will teach thee. I am thy God.”
Thereon follows the final prayer of the candidate:
“ I would be brought into timo and tune with holy
souls ” ; and then the final revelation of the mystery:
“ ’Twas I, the Word (Logos), who did sport in all [the
dancings], and was not made sport of at all. Thou
shouldst so understand, and understanding say : Glory
to Thee, Father! (Amen!).”
Surely we cannot doubt that here we have the final
link with the true prototype of our carol; the chain
hangs from the height. Both choral hymn and carol
sing of the heart’s “ true love,” and of the sacrament
of the sacred union of the perfected human life with
the Divine Mind.
In this paper I have confined myself solely to the
ground of Christian tradition ; but as the mystery is
truly ‘cosmic ’ it has many forms and modes among
men, and may be traced in the inner rites of many
faiths, both primitive and highly developed ; but that
would require a volume even for a summary.
G. R. S. M ead.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING AND
DANCING IN MEDIAEVAL CHURCHES.
The E ditor.
In the October number of The Quest for 1910, there
appeared an article on ‘The Saored Dance of Jesus,’
which dealt with traces of ceremonial and liturgical
dancing in the mediaeval and early churches of Chris­
tendom. In it an attempt was made to connect the
old English Christmaseve carol ‘To-morrow shall be
my Dancing Day,’ which was still sung in West Corn­
wall in 1833, with the earliest extant Christian ritual
(a dance combined with a mystery-drama or passion-
play) known as ‘The Hymn of Jesus,’ in the second
century Gnostic (Leucian) Acts of John. As this
pioneer study in a little known, but instructive and, I
venture to think, important subject, has aroused some
interest, and as industry has since accumulated further
data of not only sacred dancing, but also ceremonial
*game-playing ’ in mediaeval churches, I propose to lay
the evidence before the readers of The Quest in a set
of papers. In these, specific cases will be dealt with
for the most part; it being taken that the main out­
lines of the subject have been sufficiently sketched for
the general reader, if but tentatively indicated for the
scholar, in the article to which reference has been
made.
The Pelota of Auxerre.
The most striking example of so-called game­
playing in church is the famous Dance and Ball-play
91
Oct. 1512.
92 THE QUEST
known as the Polota of Auxcrre. The chief source of
our information is an unsigned Letter by the Abbe
Lebeuf, in the Mercure de France of May, 172G.1
Lebeuf first of all erroneously connects this ball-
dance with tennis (jeu de paume), roughly touches on
the philology of the term pilota or pclota, and thinks
that this peculiar custom was confined to a few of the
French churches only, and is to be dated from the 12th
or 13th century at earliest (p. 915); he then proceeds
to put the reader in possession of the facts as recorded
in the Auxerre cathedral archives.
First we have in Latin an ordinance of the
Chapter, dated April 18, 1398, under the heading:
‘Regulation for Making the Ball (Pila).’
It was resolved that Sir Stephen de Hamell and Master John
Clementeti, the new canons, shall make a Pilota on Easter
Monday . . . and [the Chapter] agreed that thoir first month
[’s stipend ?] should be paid for the said Pila.
Here ‘making a pilota ’ does not seem to mean
1 Op. cit., pp. 911-925; the Letter is dated from Auxerre, Fob. 5 of
the samo year. Joau Lebeuf was a learned and prolific writer of wide
interests. As a philologist ho was especially interested in lnte Latin terms,
which were then being studied with much zeal in connection with Dufresuc’s
(Ducango's) famous glossary. In the Challc-Quantin edition (2 vols.,
Auxerre, Paris, 1848) of Lebeuf’s Memoircs concernant VHistoire civile el
eccUsiasliquc d'Auxerre cl de son uncien Diocese, will be found a biography
and bibliography of this distinguished writer. His litorary activity included
15 special works or collections of essays; 143 letters to the Mercure dc
France (from Nov., 1723, to July, 1740); 80 Mimoires in the Journal de
Verdun, and 29 in Acad. d. Ins. et D. Lcttrcs; 3 treatises on music, and
other fugitive writings; in nil 230 pieces. Tho title of the above Letter
runs: ‘Explanation of a Low Latin Term: A Letter written from Auxerre
to M. D. L. It. about an ancient Ecclesiastical Dance abolished by Decree of
Parliament.’ Tho chief data of this Letter aro reproduced in'Dufresne’s
Glossarium ad Scriptores med. et inf. Latinitatis (1st cd. Paris, 1078;
Boned, cd., Paris, 1783, etc.; last ed., emended by L. Favro, Niort, 1880,
etc.). Tho Letter is nlso reprinted in C. Leber’s Collection dcs mcilleures
Dissertations, Notices et Traitts particulicrs, relatifs <
i VHistoire de France
(Paris, 1820), tom. 9, under tho title: *Curious Letter on tho Game of Peloto
and the Dance of the Canons of tho Chapter of Auxerre.' In his French
Translation of Durandus' llationale Die. Off. (Rational on Manuel dcs
divins Offices de Guillaume Durand, Paris, 1854), C. Barthelemy, with his
habitual impropriety, ‘lifts’ almost the entire Lotter verbatim, without the
acknowledgment of quotation-marks (in Note 8; voL v., pp. 447fL).
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 93
the mere fabrication of a ball, but rather that these
two newly-received canons were, as we shall see, to be
responsible for the expense and provision of the whole
ceremony or celebration called Pelota. This duty, it
is true, did in part consist of the ceremonial presenta­
tion1to the company, i.e. to the canons, of a certain
prescribed ball for the ceremony, and the new canon or
cauous had to provide it.
In the next place, it is to be noted that the ball
was of considerable size, for under date April 19, 1412,
we find among the statutes a regulation in Latin,
which reads in English:
It was resolved that the pilota should be of smaller size than
usual, yet so that it cannot be held or caught with one hand only.8
The *usual ’pelota or pelotte must thus have been
very large; it certainly was uo ‘tennis ball,’ and
Lebeuf is on a clearly wrong track when he refers to
our Pelota ceremony as a jeu depaumc?
1 As wo shall soo (p. 90 below), this was technically called ‘oblation,'
in tho legal documents.
a For tost, see Dufrosno (s.v. Pelota); Lebouf does not give it.
* Whatever may ho tho origin of tho English term *tennis,’ the game
itsolf was originally played with tho palm of tho hand (Fr. paume = Lat.
palma), lienee jeu de paume. It-was only later that rough racquets (reHa)
began to be used. Littrd (ed. 1863) tells us that tennis was defined in 1856,
in Latin, as ‘lusus pilas cum palma,' and that it was at this dato that it
1came in ’—a probable error, for, as a hand-game, its heredity may perhaps
go back to classical autiquity, and tho original of tho game may havo formed
part of tho important dopartmont of gymnastics known as spheristics. Tho
archffiologically worthless article on tennis in tho last ed. (11th) of tho Enc.
Brit., says that the game was first called 1luens fnc] pilte,’ clearly a
misprint for ‘lusus pilee.’ Tho late Latin term pelota or pilota was a
generic term for a wound ball of any size, and derives from tho classical
Latin pila, of which also there wore many sizes; tho non-solid or inflated
ball, however, was called follis. Thepelota was thus a solid or stuffed ball.
In French pelotc means most generally a heap, and commonly a ball of
thread, a pincushion, a round mass of anything, snow-ball, etc. It was also
a term used by tennis-ball makers, but only for tho inside of the ball before
it was covered, and not for the completed article. Variations of the term
pelota aro found in all the Romance languages, and numbers of our readers
must havo seen the famous *Basque ’ game of glorified and gigantic tennis,
called pelota in Spanish, of which there are innumerable courts (frondons)
in tho Peninsula, and ono also at Rome. Tho point of this lengthy noto is
91 THE QUEST
Lebeuf, with the full text of the above decree of
the Chapter before him in the cathedral registers,
which he, however, unfortunately does not cite textu-
ally, tells us, further, that it was decided that the
pelota should be presented with the Long-established
solemnities; that it should be used in the customary
manner, and that the president of the company (or, as
we shall see later, the oblator of the ball) was em­
powered, if he thought fit, to lock it up in his own
house, so that, apparently, it might not be used
improperly or for a secular purpose. It was thus
presumably regarded as a sacred object.
The first overt protest against this anoient
ceremony was made, according to the registers, on
Easterday, April 14, 1471. Lebeuf’s account runs (in
summary) as follows:
Maltrc Gdrard Royer, Doctor of Theology of the University of
Paris and a famous scholar, had shortly before been received as a
canon of the cathedral. It was accordingly his turn for furnishing
and presenting the famous pelote. The hour of the ceremony
arrived. All the nobles, gentry and magistrates, and a crowd of
citizens were assembled, together with all the clergy, in the nave
of the sacred edifico ; but there was no pelote. The recalcitrant
canon, who was present, was incontinently taken to task. He
excused himself on the plea that ho had read in the Rationale1
of Durand, that this ancient custom was not *convenablc.' His
objections, however, wore over-ruled, and he had to go and bring
last year’s pelote from the house of the canon who had presented
it and looked it up after the ceremony. Thereupon the murmurs
ceased, and the Doctor presented it publicly and with great
dignity to Mr. Dean, and to the other Messieurs of tho Chapter,
assembled in the presence of tho governor of Auxerre and of the
to show that the pelote of Auxerro was a large stuffed ball and not a small
tennis-ball, or oven an inflated large hand- or foot-ball. Lebouf, nevertheless,
inconseqnently calls it ‘balle ou ballon' (p. 910), and Dufresne also («.v.) gives
baton as a synonym.
1 L. 6, c. 86§ 90, and p. 104 below.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 95
other notabilities and chief magistrates, and of the crowds of
citizens who had gathered in even greater numbers because of the
rumour of the contretemps. And, the Latin register continues:
“ Thereupon they [the clergy] began to execute the dance in
the accustomed manner; and at the end of the ceremony they
returned to the chapter-house for the repast1
” (p. 918).
Hereafter public opinion began gradually to change.
But it was not till fifty years later that the crisis was
reached, when Laurent Bretel, cureof one of the Auxerre
parishes, on being received as a new canon of the
metropolitan church, flatly refused to take any part
whatever in the pelote ceremony. A great outcry
naturally arose among the defenders of antiquity, but
the sturdy canon appealed to the civil court (bailliage)
of Auxerre, which sustained him and not only found
fault with the ceremony, but formally condemned it
and ordered the Chapter to change the old custom
into something of a more edifying nature. This judg­
ment was l-endered on April 22, 1521. The Chapter at
once appealed to the highest court of the realm ; but
Canon Bretel, by no means dismayed, defended the
case, and all the world of Paris was soon talking of
nothing but the Pelote of Auxerre. Thereupon a
commissioner was despatched to Auxerre for the
Easterday ceremony of March 28, 1535. On his return
his report was examined by four Councillors of Parlia­
ment, four Canons of Notre-Dame do Paris, and four
Doctors of the Sorbonne, counsel for both sides being
present. And the result was that the decision of the
court of Auxerre was sustained in the formal judgment
th a t:
“ The plaint made by the dean, canons and chapter of Auxerre
could not be accepted ” ; that the ceremony should be reformed,
1 Collatio; the ‘sacred meal ’ was one of the chief elements of snoh
ceremonies : it will be dealt with in a subsequent paper,
9G THE QUEST
omitting “ any offering (oblation) of the pclotc in the shape of a
ball . . . or any repast.”
Moreover the Chapter was ordered to pay all
Master Laurent Bretel’s costs, which must have
amounted to a pretty penny (pp. 918-921). The repast
was commuted into a sum of money which all the
newly received canons had to pay, and which was
called pilota up to 1789.1
But what was the ceremonial ball-play which was
danced in the cathedral of Auxerre, and of whose
origin and import neither party, nor even the learned
Lebeuf himself, seems to have an inkling? To the
latter question a speculative answer will be attempted
later on; meantime let us turn our attention to the
ancient ceremony itself, at any rate so far as the dim
memory of its old age will permit us to reconstruct its
main features.
Lebeuf (p. 922) extracts the following description
of it from a Latin MS. in the cathedral archives, which
his vague reference3unfortunately does not allow us to
date with any certainty.
When the ball [pilota) had been accepted from the newly
received canon,* the dean, or another in his stead (in former times
with his head covered with his nmice,4 and the rest [of the canons]
in like manner), began to intone in antiphon the sequence [prosa),
appropriate to the Easter festival, which begins: *Praise to the
1 See Barthdlemy, op. cit., pp. 449, 451.
a “ TJn peu posUrieur au temps de Vhistoire." This probably means
“ shortly after the records begin ” ; for Vhistoire can hardly refer to the
famous trial.
* “ A prosclyto seu tirone canonico.” Proselytus and tiro are evidently
technical terms for the youngest (not in age, but in seniority of office, as e.g.
among the Therapeuts) member of the company. Proselytus (advena) may
carry us back to the mystery-institutions, the term being found in the
Isiac cult, for instance (cp. Apuleius), and of course to Jewry and the
Therapeuts and Essenes of Philo; while tiro connects with chivalry,
tyrocinium being the office of a new-made knight (cp. Dufrcsne, s.v.).
* Almutia, a capo, hood or wrap, with which both head and shoulders
were covered. It generally had two ends banging down front or back.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 97
Paschal Victim.’ Then, supporting the ball with his left hand,
he begins dancing,1 in time with tho rhythmical sounds of the
chanted sequence, while the rest, holding hands, execute a choral
dance (chorea) round the labyrinth.3
Meanwhile the hall (pilota) was handed or thrown alternately
by the dean to the dancers* one by one or several at a time,
wreath-wise.4 When the chanting of the sequence and the danc-
1 Tripudium, generally a quick dance, but was also used of tho dancing
of the Angels by Patristic writers.
1 Dadajus, so-called from the legendary builder of tho famous Cretan
labyrinth, which was supposed (probably erroneously) to have been a
smaller copy of the great Egyptian ‘mazo ’of 8000 chambers, tho remains
of which are still to bo found l l | miles from the pyramid of Hawara in tho
Fayyum. It is said that of these 3000 chambers, 1500 wero underground,
and a like number above ground. Herodotus was not allowed to enter the
subterranean part. Pliny’s idea was that tho number of the main halls
corresponded with tho nomes or divisions of Egypt, and that the general
plan of the building was connected with that of the solar system; and
indeed it is well known that tho terrestrial topography of Egypt (and of other
1sacred lands ’ in antiquity) was supposed to bo a replica of celestial or astral
geography, or of uranography. It is more to our preBont purpose, however,
that there was in classical antiquity a famous dance connected with tho
labyrinth and its myth. Of this dance Johannes Meursius giTes us the
following indications, in his Orchestra sive de Saltaiivnibus Vctcrum. (See
J. Gronovius, Tint. Grmc. Antiqq., ed. J. C. Bulenger, Lug. Bat., 1699, fol.,
col. 1245 b -d .) Plutarch, at the end of the first contury (quoting from
Dicearchus, a contemporary of Aristotlo) hands on (Vit. Thcs.) tho ancient
tradition that Theseus “ sailing from Crete cast anchor at Delos ; and having
sacrificed to tho god [Apollol and dedicated a statue which had been given
him by Ariadne, to Aphrodite, joined with tho youth [of his company who
had been rescued from tho Minotaur] in o dance, which tho people of
Dolos are said to keep up as a sacred sorvico to tho present day. This
dance was a mime or mimicry of tho circuits and passages in tho labyrinth,
and was executed by means of a series of ordered movements, including
certain alternations and revolutions [or twistings, unrollings or unfoldings].
This kind of dance is called the ‘crane ’by tho Delians.” Tho Greek Sophist
Pollux, writing about 175 a.d., tolls us further that “ tho 1crane' is performed
by a number of dancers, one over against tho other in rows, the end of
either filo being taken by leaders, in imitation of Thosous and his companions,
who were tho first to mimo the way out of the labyrinth, by dancing it
round the altar "—sc. of tho templo of tho sun. It is further to be noted that
Hosychius (Lex. s.v. ytpavos) speaks not only of ‘ running ’ or *dancing'
round tho altar at Delos, but also of being ‘beaten’ or ‘drivon’ (most
probably 1scourged ’ or ‘whipped') round i t ; and adds that it was a service
or ‘ceremony of thanksgiving' (*vxa/’1<rn?Pt“)> instituted by Theseus in
gratitude for his escape from the labyrinth.
* Choribaudis, in overy text, including the most recent edition of
Dufresne, but clearly a reiterated mistake from tho first copyist, Lebeuf.
As there is a middle Latin form choriare (to dance), I suggest choriantibus
as the correct reading.
1 Lebeuf has ‘serii in speciem'; but serii is clearly a misprint for
serli. It suggests the idea of weaving or intertwining a wreath (cp.
Dufresne, s.v.).
98 THE QUEST
ing (saltatio) are over, the band (or choir, chorus), after the dance
(chorea) used to hurry off to the repast (merenda). There, all [the
canons] of the chapter, as well as the chaplains and officials,
together with certain of the moro distinguished citizens, used to
sit on benches in the *corona ’* or in the orchestra.3 And all,
without exception, were served with [the repast] ,8 and white and
red wine was also served but in temperate and modest quantities,
that is to say tho cups were filled once or twice. During the meal
the reader intoned a festal homily from tho chair or pulpit.1
Shortly afterwards when tho larger bells rang from the tower
for vespers, etc. (pp. 921, 922).
As it is highly probable that Lebeuf had beforo
him other sources of information (either in tho
registers or other MSS. of the cathedral archives)
besides the above Latin extract, it is of interest to see
how ho differs from the text in his glossing of the
passage. It means, ho says, that:
The canon who had been most recently received, stood ready,
holding his ball (pelotte) in front of his chest,5 in tho nave of St.
Stephen's, about one or two of the clock in tho afternoon. Ho
then presented it formally to the dean, or to tho senior dignitary
present, who put what is termed tho poke (poclic) of his amice
over his head in order to manipulate the ball with greator ease.5
1 Probably tlio name of tho chapter-hall; corona was also a titlo of
distinction for higher ecclesiastics.
s In mediaeval churches, and doubtless in moro anciont ones as well, tho
orchestra was a platform or Btago, or at any rato a raised place, in tho
sacred edifico, whero the actors or executants (mimi) gave their performances
(actiones).
! Tho various dishes, cakes, etc., mentioned in tho toxt will be dealt
with in a subsequent paper.
* Cathedra aut pulpito. This clearly shows that when tho ceremonial
repast was taken in tho church itself, tho pulpit was in the orchestra; this
was probably an aroa in front of tho choir raised above tho level of the nave.
5 As it was too big to hold in tho hand, ho must liavo 1cuddled ’it.
8 This is by no means an illuminating guess. People do not put their
heads in a poke tho better to play at ball 1 I hazard tho suggestion that
it may have been the dim relic of an anciont ceremony whon tho head was
veiled or covered as in the mystorios. It is to be noted that all tho dancers
were thus covered.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 99
When tho dean had ceremoniously taken over the ball, he
supported it, as tho canon had done, on his breast with his left
arm.1 And thereupon he immediately caught hold of one of the
canons by the hand and began a dance, which was followed by the
dancing of the other canons in a circle or in another mode (p. 923).
Then the sequence ‘Praises to tho Paschal Victim ’ was chanted,
accompanied by tho organ, in order to make the singing more
regular and more in time with the dance-movement. The organ
was within hearing of tho actors or executants, as they played
their parts almost underneath the organ-loft (or organ-case, buffet),
at a place in the nave where, prior to 1690, was to be seen a kind
of labyrinth, in the form of several interlaced circles, ns is still the
case in the cathedral of Sons.2 But the finest part of tho pro­
ceedings was the ‘circulation ’ of tho ball, that is to say the pass­
ing (renvoi) of it from the leader of the company to the several
players, and repassing of it back by them to tho president, who
was probably in tho middle of the ring clad in all his distinctive
vestments and ornaments.
Lebouf was not able to find any details in the
registers as to the figures of tho dance (see p. 923), and
unfortunately he did not possess a full copy of the
report which was submitted to the supreme court in
the cause celebre. His conjecture that the dance must
1 I suggest that it was held breast high in front of tho face on tho
curved left arm.
5 Similar labyrinths were not uncommon features in mediaeval, and
perhaps also more ancient, churches. “ Geometrical figures composed of
various pieces of coloured marbles and so disposed as to form labyrinths were
frequently found in tho pavements of French cathedrals and so-called
labyrinthes <
lepave. [They were also common in Spain; where there is at
least one still at Seville.] Tho finest remaining sample is in the centre of
tho nave of Notre-Dame, Chartres, and a person following tho various
windings and turns of the figure would walk nearly 800 feet before he
arrived at tho centre, although the circumference does not exceed thirteen
yards. Similar labyrinths formerly existed at Notre-Dame, Paris, at the
cathedral of Reims, and at Amiens. This latter was taken up in the latter
part of tho last century and the centre stone (which is octangular (cp. tho
ogdoad, p. 120 below] and was formerly inlaid with brass imagery) is still
preserved in tho museum of that city. These labyrinths are supposed to
havo originated in a symbolical allusion to tho Holy City, and certain
prayers and devotions doubtless accompanied tho perambulation of their
intricate mazes.”—T. H. Poole, art. ‘Labyrinth,’ The Catholic Encyclopedia,
(London, 1910). The information with wliich tho faithful are supplied is to
say the least vague. As a matter of fact pilgrims to Chartres still practise
tho devotion of the rosary on tho labyrinth.
3
100 THE QUEST
have been a sort of lively branlc1is, in my opinion,
unsound. On the contrary, it must have been a com­
paratively stately measure, not only on account of the
size of the ball, but also because it followed the chant
of the sequence. All wo can legitimately conjecture
is that though the dance of the dean may have been
trodden to a more rapid measure, the dance of the
others was choral and presumably stately, at any rate
originally.
Lebeuf is, therefore, I hold, somewhat extravagant
when he proceeds (p. 924) to draw a comic picture of
the grave church dignitaries breathlessly waltzing, with
their violet cassocks tucked up to their waists, and the
ends of their amices fluttering in violent agitation
behind them. He starts with the false notion of a jeu
de paume, a secular merry game and dance at best,
and then falls into quite unnecessary difficulties and
contradictions.
So much for what we can glean directly of the
famous ball-dance of Auxorre itsolf. But this does not
dispose of the general subject, for Lebeuf returns to it
in a second Letter to the Mercure dc France (March,
1727).a Lebcuf’s former Letter, it appears, had made
quite a stir; ho therefore proceeds to give other
instances of ecclesiastical ball-play. Auxerre’s cathedral
was not the only church in which the ceremony had
been used; the distinction of St. Stephen’s was that
it had been the last chapter obstinatoly to cling to the
ancient custom.
1 “ The branl<? or brunle gai is the generic name of all tho dances in
■whichone or two dancers load the others, who repeat the steps of the lenders.
There are, or rather there were, also Ironies scrieux" (Littre).
a Under the title: ‘Remarks on several curious Contributions to the
Mercurcs of 1726, addressed to tho Editors of this Journal ’—dated from
Auxerro, Jan. 2, 1727—op. cit. pp. 49-lff.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 101
T h e P e l o t a o f N a r b o n n e .
Lebeuf had been informed by a correspondent that
at Vienne in Dauphine, that is at Narbonne, the custom
of *throwing the ball ’ at the Easter festival had
obtained in ancient times. When the records begin,
however, the ceremony was no longer celebrated in the
sacred edifice itself, but in the hall of the archbishop’s
palace, where all the clergy of tho cathedral assembled
on Easter Monday, while the bells were ringing for
vespers. On such feast days the bells rang for a con­
siderable time, during which the ceremonial repast
was partaken in the prelate’s palace, and after this
meal the archbishop *threw the ball.’ A MS. of the
13th century, in the cathedral archives, contained the
following rubric for Easter Monday in Latin :
While tho bolls are ringing for vespors, the whole chapter
(eonventm) is to assemble in tho hall of tho archbishop’s house ;
there tables are to bo laid, and tho servants (viinistri) of the
archbishop are to servo [cortain dishes'] with wino to follow.
Afterwards tho archbishop is to throw tho ball (pelota).
This custom must have been kept up for at least
three centuries subsequently, for on the margin of tho
MS. there is the following Latin note in a handwriting
that was judged to be two hundred years old :
And it should be known that tho prefect5 is to provide the
ball, and is to throw it in the archbishop’s absenco (p. 495).1
2
1 The list will be dealt with in a subsequent papor.
2 Mislralis = niinistralis = minutcrialis. Dufresne (s.v.) Buys that the
mistralet wore majorcs urbium, and adds that at Narbonno there were two
of these ‘mayors,' one for tho Count of Vienno and the other for the
Archbishop; tho latter was chosen from the canons and filled tho offico of
prefect of tho city. Cp. Jean do Lievre, Histoiro tie VAnliquiti et Saincteti
do la Citi tie Vienne en la Qaule celtique (Vienne, 1028), p. 414, who tells us
that prior to the middlo of tho 15th century, tho Archbishop had tho solo
jurisdiction, with his ‘mistral ’ as judgo in temporal affairs and his 1official ’
as spiritual judge in all matters concerning the church.
102 THE QUEST
The prefect was doubtless the most important
official after the archbishop, and he accordingly led the
ceremony in the absence of his superior. It is also
evident that as in this instance the ‘ball throwing'
took place after the ceremonial repast, it must,
originally at any rate, have been of a sober and dignified
nature. It could not have been a simple game of hand­
ball, as Lebouf seems to imagine, when writing (p. 494)
“ IcPrelat s’amusoit ajetter la Pelotte,” for in any case
people do not, if they are wise, play ball immediately
after a meal. Lebouf, however, cannot get tennis out
of his head, and so proceeds to tell us that thejeu de
paunie was not forbidden by canon law, under chapter
‘Clcrici.’ He then hazards that this pelota probably
resembled the hand-ball and ‘baloon ’ games of the
students in the Paris colleges, and makes some allusion
to the fact that hand-ball was played in antiquity by
the most distinguished personages, such as kings and
bishops. In the latter unfruitful line of research, as
far as the present study is concerned, we need not
follow him; but as to the former it may be of interest
here to note that, as I have been verbally informed,
in seminaries on the continent some very ancient
games are still played, and to suggest that an enquiry,
with perhaps some fruitful results, might open up in
this direction. Faint traces of originally ‘ecclesiastical
games ’may still be preserved in such little suspected
quarters.
T h e P e r c u l a o f N a p l e s .
That the ball-dance of Auxerre and the ball­
throwing of Narbonne were not isolated phenomena,
and that neither play nor dance was due to ‘Gothic
iuflucnco,’may be seen from the Percula of Naples,
CEKEMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 103
which was played (and may have been danced also) well-
nigh under the shadow of the Holy See itself. Dufresne
equates Percula with Pelota, but is able to give us one
reference only, viz. to the Acta of S. Pomponius.1
Pomponius was Bishop of Naples from 508 to 536. He
built and dedicated the church of S. Maria Major to
the B. V. M. for her supposed aid in exorcising the
devil who, as the legend went, had laid waste much of
the city in the form of a boar. So at any rate it is
recorded in the Glironicum of John, Deacon of the said
church, who lived in the 9th century. After recording
this ‘factum,1the worthy chronicler continues :
4. In memory of this event the Neapolitans celebrated every
year in this church certain games of ball (percula) for the comfort
and refreshment of the soul, amid a great concourse of the
populace. An exhibition of these games was given to the people
by the vassals of the Church of Naples, from tho country-seats
and suburbs, on the Feast of tho Translation of S. Januarius, in
the month of May, to wit on tho third Sunday of tho said month.
Though, unfortunately, no description of these
games is given, the points to be chiefly noted are that
they were ceremonial (celcbrarunt), that they were
played in the sacred edifice itself, and that they are
specifically stated to have had a religious or spiritual
purpose (ad solatium atquc animi recreationem). As
to the legend in connection with the founding of S.
Mary’s tho Greater, the learned Jesuit editors are of
opinion that it is a mythical or allegorical allusion
either to the purification of a former Arian church by
Catholic rites, for which they adduce evidence of similar
phraseology in other cases, or to the fact that the site
of the church had been occupied formerly by a house
1 Seo Acta Sanctorum (ed. Henschen-Papenbrocli, ed. nov. Carnandet,
Paris and Rome, 1866), Maii, tom. 8, p. 372 b, ‘Do Sancto Pomponio
Episcopo Neapolitano.’
101 THE QUEST
of ill-fame. Though the Percula of Naples throws no
new light on the Pelota of Auxerre, it proves that
ball-games in church were not confined to French
dioceses; indeed our quotation stands out rather as a
finger-post pointing to a forgotten but widespread
territory of ancient ecclesiastical custom in this
respect.
T he T estimony of B eleth and Durand.
Further, Jean Beleth, rector of the theological
faculty at Paris, in treating of the customs of the
Church at Eastertide, tells us that in his day (o. 1166):
There are some churches in which even bishops and arch­
bishops play with their subordinates in the convents (cccnobiis)
stooping even to ball-play {lusus piles). . . . But although
largo churches liko Reims keep up this custom of playing, it seoms
more praiseworthy not to do so.1
Durand, Canon of Narbonne and afterwards Bishop
of Monde, at the end of the 13th century, ‘lifts ’this pas­
sage from Beleth without acknowledgment, but with the
interesting gloss that in some churches at Easter and
in others at Christmas, tho prelates and clergy play at
dice, in the cloisters or bishop’s palaces, and even go
so far as playing at ball and dances and songs.2 Both
these writers connect these customs with what was
called the ‘December Freedom,’ originally, of course,
the Roman Saturnalia, but, as we shall see later on,
with little probability that this ‘libcrtas decembrica ’
will satisfactorily Bolve the problem.
1 Divinorum Officiorum ac eorundem Eationuin Explicatio, c. 120;
Migno, P. L., tom. 202 (Paris, 1855).
3 Eationale Divinorum Officiorum (I. 6. c. 86 §9), which first appeared in
1286 ; Migne, P. L., tom. 202 (Paris, 1855).
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 105
T h e B r id e-Ball T heory.
The only writer of recent times who has attempted
a solution is "Wilhelm Mannliardt. In eh. v. §10 of his
famous work, Mannliardt treats in detail of the wide­
spread custom of the bride-ball; after referring on two
pages1to the subject of ball-plajnng in church, he then
sums up his evidence as follows :
The bride-ball must have had some close connection with tho
green foliage, tho young vegetation (cp. the ball’s being knocked to
pieces in the green fir-wood); it appears to have been essential to
the young married pair. I imagine the 6 tato of affairs to have
been that tho couple is supposed to have the privilege of tho
bride-ball for a year, and that the maidens then reclaim it, because
tho use of tho privilege expired with tho close of the year for that
particular pair ; another ball for another couple had then to take
its turn (p. 479).s The matter would be clear if wo ventured to
conceive the bride-ball as a symbol of tho sun-sphere—that fiery
disk, of which the ‘ball of ashes, of gold’ (p. 172), tho making of
the shot rod-hot in Kloin-Molson, tho shapo of the notched ball
given to the maidens in Ellichsloben, etc. (p. 478), are probably not
simply chance memories—and if wo further ventured to think of
tho bride and young married couple ns representatives of the bride-
pair of the spring. This interpretation is supported by tho fact
that they must be people who were married before Fire-brand
Sunday (p. 478, Dimanclie dc Brandons)s and also by tho threnton-
1 Weld- u. Feld-Kulte (zrucite Av.fl. besorght von Dr. W. Ilensclikcl,
Berlin, 1904/05), vol. ii. pp. 477, 478. These pages repeat word for word tho
text of the lsted. (1875/77), and show not the slightest sign of ‘caro’of revision
at tho hands of tho editor. M. has only a second or third-hand acquaint­
ance with a few of our sources, and his quotations, at any rate in tlioao
pages, are exceedingly inaccurate. His puzzling roforcnco is: *Fosbroko’s
Brit. Monach bei Hone I, 215. Cf. Chambers I, 429.' M. was dependent
entirely on Hone = S. Hone, Every Day Bool: (London, 1806). Chambers =
R. Chambers, The Book of Days. Fosbroke = Thomas Dudley Fosbrooko,
British Monachism; or, Manners and Customs of the Monks and Nuns of
England (3rd cd., London, 1843), p. 50. M. says that this' ball-playing in
church was an English custom. Fosbrooko says ‘probably practised only
abroad.'
a The knocking.of tho ball to piccos, I would rather suggest, symbolised
tho birth of tlio child.
* The first Sunday of Lent (Careme), the forty-six days from Shrove
Tuesday to Easter.
10G THE QUEST
ing of tho young wife, in Arendsee, if she seem reluctant: 1TPe
will tako away from thee thy mate blooming like a green tree, and
give thee instead a dry one.” The decision of this question must
of course depend on how we have to explain the widespread
custom, in North Germany and England, of playing at ball on
Shrove Tuesday, Easter and Christmas. At Landsberg on the
Wartho, on the third day of Easter, they play at ball down in the
meadows and the game ends up with a dance called ‘keeping (or
celebrating) the Easter ball.’
At Kiez, near Kopenick, this still takes place on tho first day
of the Easter festival before sunrise, but at other places at other
times of tho day; neither rain nor snow-storm stops the play and
dance. Tho English forms of these customs show that in those
celebrations also, tho seating of the newly-wedded opposite tho
unmarried played the chief r6lc, that they were attenuated
survivals of playing with the bride-ball, and that with the develop­
ment of the ball-play in society they had undergone much
modernisation. . . . Tho hurling the ball over the roof of the
gateway or over the church resembles disk- (or quoit-) throwing.
Tho importance of tho custom of the Easter-ball is shown by tho
circumstance that tho policy of tho Church considered it necessary
to consecrate it, or at any rate to Christianise it entirely, doubt­
less in the hope of being able to transform it, by appropriation to
tho divine service, into a symbol of Christ himself, the rising
Easter-sun. Last of all, though not least, in support of our inter­
pretation comes the fact that in Oldenburg the Easter-ball seems
to stand in evident connection with tho Eastor-fire. Both
children and grown-ups play at ball on tho afternoons of both
foast-days. At Ganderkesen the grown-ups indulge in ball-play at
tho Easter bonfire and afterwards go to the tavern to play
Klumpsack,a in which the young maidens are also allowed to tako1
2
1 For the symbolism of the green and dry tree in marriage-customs and
in mysticism, in tho middle ages, cp. Prof. Franz Hamper's art. ‘ Dante
and the Renaissance,' The Quest, vol. ii. no. 4 (July, 1911), pp. 725, 730.
2 I do not know tho English equivalent for this game. Klump in
Klumpsack (N. Ger. Plumpsack) refers to tho knots in a haudkorchiof. Tho
players apparently strike one another with their knotted handkerchiefs.
Schmitz, Sillen . . . des Eijlcr Volks, i. 88 : “ The one has to whistle
and the other, Klumpsack in hand, tries to strike the whistler." Murct-
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 107
part. In Westphalia this game is played on the bonfire spot, of
course before it is lighted. And so ball-play may have formed
part of the Easter-fire.
Or, In spite of all, has the whole ceremony of the hride-ball
at Easter arisen from an ecclesiastical origin, from Christian
symbolism? And is it consistent with this that the hall is
frequently thrown over the church (p. 478), or that the play starts
from the cross (p. 474) ?
T h e D ir e c t io n in w h ic h a P r o b a b l e S o l u t io n may
b e S o u g h t .
To this very important question Mannhardt gives
no answer. But whatever may be the derivation and
history of the folk-custom of the bride-ball and dance,
which in its most general aspects belongs to the
comparative soience of folk-lore, I have little doubt
myself that the ceremonial ball-dance of Auxerre and
its ecclesiastical cognates should have their heredity
traoed to a tradition within the Churoh, and that, too,
from early times. There are many customs of a
superficially similar nature, it is true, that in course of
time forced themselves on the Church from without,
and which the authorities had very great trouble to
keep outside the doors of the sacred edifice, and indeed
some of these irregular observances frequently invaded
the sacred precincts. But at the same time also some
ceremonies, though fundamentally of non-Christian
origin (for indeed few of the innumerable Church-
observances were really original to the faith), were of
early introduction and so to speak adopted into the
sanctuary. I venture to think that the ball-dance of
Sanders quote as an alternative title of this game the tag : “ Dreh' dich niclit
um, der Plumptack geht ’rum "—which I take to mean: H you don’t keep on
waltzing you’ll be thwacked. This brings to mind the ‘driving ’or ‘beating ’
round the altar at Delos (above p. 97 n. 2).
108 THE QUEST
which Auxerre preserved the last dim memory, was
one of these. It was a dance on a similar, if not
identical, plan to the dance1 in the second century
Acts of John, between which and the carol ‘To-morrow
shall be my Dancing Day,’ I endeavoured to establish
a series of links in my previous paper on ‘The Sacred
Dance of Jesus.’ That dance was, as I think I have
shown, a mystery-ritual of regeneration or of the unio
mystica. If Lebeuf’s conjecture (p. 99, above) is
correct that there were two dancers within the circle
or ring, of whom one was dancing the same dance as
the leader of the rite, who was in full canonicals, while
the rest danced a round dance of another order, this is
in striking confirmation of my interpretation of the
text of the Acts as in one of its elements the union of
the Christ and Sophia. In any case, if Pliny’s idea
(p. 97 n. 2, above) of the plan of the Egyptian
labyrinth is correct, it was a dance in imitation of the
dance and harmony of the celestial spheres and starry
host, a notion taken over from the sidereal cult or
astral religion of antiquity.2
But what of the ball, the pclotci ? It will be
remembered that one of the chief elements in the
*Hymn of Jesus ’is the passion-play which was danced;
it was the most sacred part of the mystery. Of the
details we are unfortunately told nothing directly in
the text of the Acta, but as I have suggested from the
words of the ritual (op. cit. p. 74):
Hereupon . . . the mystery-drama, the Passion of Man,
must have been shown (i.e. danced). What it may have been is
1 For an introduction, commentary and notes, see the writer’s Hymn of
Jesui (Echoes from the Gnosis, iv., London, 1907), and for tlio text Bonnet
M.), Acta Apost. Apoc. (Leipzig, 1898), H. ii. 197ff. (§§ 94-97).
* For the best account of this see Franz Cnmont’s just published
Astrology and Religion among the Greehs and Romans (New York and
London, 1912).
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 109
not easy to conjecture; it must, however, have boon something of
a most distressing nature, for the neophyte is ‘moved ’ or ‘shaken
completely.’ . . . Presumably he saw . . . [the represen­
tative of] the Master dismembered before his eyes . . . or in
some way done to death.
The drama was symbolical of the mystery of the
human soul, of its passion and the final union of the
human with the divine; but it was chiefly typical of
the *passion ’ of the divine in human form, of the
Logos made flesh. Now the ancient higher mystery-
institutions had two main grades ; in the lower wore
shown the mysteries of generation or physical birth and
death ; in the higher, the mystery of regeneration or of
spiritual birth and life. The symbolism of marriage
played tho principal rdle in both grades. It is thus
easy to understand that there was a close parallelism
between the outward marriage ceremonies and customs
and the inner spiritual observances and rites. In this
connection it is of interest to note that tho bride-ball
was burst asunder or even knocked or torn to pieces,
and it is very probable that there may have been a
somewhat similar symbolic ceremony, typified by a
ball, in such initiatory rites, of which the tearing in
pieces of the *god ’ is a well-known element. This,
however, was not the case at Auxerre, for the pelote
was kopt intaot after the ceremony. Nevertheless the
*play ’ seems to bo clearly part of the same complex of
ideas; the passing of the ball backwards and forwards,
in the circular dance, in which every dancer also
revolved on his own axis, so to say, may very well have
been thought to typify the apparent path or dance of
the sun in the heavens throughout the year1
, and so of
its ‘passion,’ and of tho corresponding *passion ’ of
the earth in its seasons, all of which was further
THE QUEST
believed to be analogous with the ‘suffering ’ of the
divine soul in human incarnation. In any case the
ceremony at Auxerre was in closest connection with
the death, burial and resurrection of the Christ-sun at
Easter.
How this sacred dance got to Auxerre,1and what
are the historic links between the earliest-known Chris­
tian rites of this nature referred to in the subsequently
deemed heretical Acta, and the not only tolerated but
fully sanctioned ceremonies of a similar nature in the
post-Constantine and mediaeval churches, are subjects
of research for the historian and archaeologist of cere­
monial. At present no one has attempted to solve the
problem; indeed the present is the first clear definition
of it which has been attempted, for Mannhardt’s
question remains but a query.
T he B urial of Allelu ia .
But the ball-play or dance was not the only
symbolical ceremonial rite of this nature of which we
can find traces in the medicoval churches. There was
a still stranger and, for the student of ecclesiastical
arcliteology, more instructive ‘game ’ in connection
with the Alleluia ceremonies. We owe our information
again to the indefatigable Abb6 Lebeuf,2who is, how-
1 As it was played at Reims, according to Beleth, and very generally in
Franco, and ns wo know that tho ‘Hymn of Jesus ’ was in widest circulation
among the Priscillianists, the last great Gnostic movement, of the fourth
century, and that tho Priscillinnist propaganda spread from Spain through­
out Gaul, and was centred at Trives, it may bo that here we have one
of tho links. Moreover the labyrinth-dance itself most probably found a
still earlier stage of transition in tho oldest forms of tho Christianised Gnosis,
for in the famous Naasseno Hymn (Hipp. lief. v. 10, D. and S. p. 174), the
Human soul is said to bo “ wandering in the labyrinth of ills,” to free her
from which, nnd to lead her out of tho labyrinth, the Saviour desconds
bringing the Gnosis (Mead, Fragments, p. 205; Hermes, i. 191).
a See Marcure de France, Doc., 1726, pp. 2656-2673, for his unsigned
communication, dated Aug. 16 of the same year, and entitled: ‘Letter
written from Burgundy to M. do S. R. about some curious Peculiarities of
110
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 111
ever, as in the case of the Pclota, entirely at sea as to
its origin and significance.
The original Hebrew doxological formula Alleluia
(Hallelu Jah=Praise Jah) has supplied the basis for a
number of Latin substantival, adjectival and verbal
forms, with which we need not trouble the reader.
Not only so, but Alleluia or Alleluja had been personi­
fied as a feminine potency, and not only personified but
made to suffer death, burial and resurrection (p. 2658).
In following up a previous essay on the Feast of
Fools,1 Lebeuf had looked through all the statutes
of the oathedral chapters of which he could obtain
copies or consult the originals. Among these he had
examined a MS. copy of the statutes of the cathedral
church of Toul in Lorraine (Dep. Meurthe), redacted
in 1497, by Nicolas le Sane, Licentiate of Law and
Canon of the cathedral (p. 2664).a In these registers,
what was Lebeuf’s surprise to find, at Art. XV., the
strange heading ‘Alleluia is Buried,’ and thereunder
the following curious ordinance :
On tho Saturday of Septuagosima Sunday,’ at nones, tho
choir-boys aro to assemble in tho groat vestry, in festal attire,
and thero to arrange tho burial of Alleluia. And, after the
last Benedicamus, they aro to go in procession, with crosses,
torches (torciis, Duf. tortiis), holy water and incense, and
carrying a clod of earth as at a funeral, and aro to proceed across
tho choir, and go to the cloister, wailing (ululantes), to the place
where she [sc. Alleluia] is buried. And after one of them has
two MSS.—tho ono of Tool and tho other of Sens.' Lebeuf asks the editor
of tho Mercure to hand on the information to the learned Benedictine editor
of tho new ed. of Dufresne’s Glossary (Paris, 1783, etc.) which was then in
hand.
1 Cp. Mercure de France, July, 1725.
8 In Lebeuf's time this MS. was in the Public Library of the City which
had been founded in the previous year (1726) by M. Fenel, Dean of the
metropolitan church (p. 2678).
8 That is, sixty-three days before Easter,
112 THE QUEST
sprinkled the water and a socond censed [tho grave], thoy return
by the same way. Such is the custom from of old.
Lebeuf conjectures that in this ceremony, which
took place between nones and vespers, with the full
sanction and approval of the Chapter, the hoys must
have carried a sort of bier on which was the representa­
tion of the deceased Alleluia who was laid in a grave
in the cloister (p. 2G59).
T he W hipping of Allelu ia .
But tho burial and mourning for her were not
the only rites of this nature in connection with the
beautiful Alleluia office, which was of course celebrated
in the sacred edifice itself, for Lobeuf was assured by
an informant that in one of the dioceses near Paris,
the following extraordinarily interesting ceremony took
place in the cathedral itself. On the Saturday before
Septuagesima one of the choir-boys used to bring to
church a whipping-top (tonpic), round which was
painted in fair golden letters the name Alleluia.
When the moment came in the service for bidding
Alleluia farewell, tho boy, whip in hand, scourged the
top down the pavement of tho church and out of doors.
This ceremony was called ‘Whipping Alleluia ’(p. 2GG4).
Lebeuf hoped to get some further information on what
he calls 1cette bizarre comcdie,’ from some antiquarian
in the dioceso, especially with regard to the ceremony
of the resurrection and return of Alleluia on Easter-
day, as to whether there was also a ‘Whipping-back
of Alleluia ’ but unfortunately I can find nothing more
on the subject in the learned Abbe’s voluminous
writings. We arc, however, not yet at the end of our
resources, aud shall first of all see what light can be
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 113
thrown upon these seemingly strange rites, from the
‘Office of Alleluia ’ itself, as used in the dioceses of
Burgundy in the middle ages.
Fortunately, the Benedictine editor of the 2nd ed.
of Dufresne’s Glossary obtained from Lebeuf an almost
verbatim copy of this beautiful Office as it used to be
practised at Auxerre, from the 13th century MS.
Latin liturgies of the metropolitan church and its
dioceses. It runs as follows:
T h e A l l e l u ia t ic O f f ic e f o r S a t u r d a y in
S e p t u a g e s im a .
At Ve s p e r s .
Antiph. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.
Chap. Blessed, etc.
Hymn.
Alleluia, song melodious,
Voice of everlasting joy,
Alleluia, praise sweet-sounding
Even to the choirs on high,
'Which they sing for over dwolling
Through tho ages in God’s homo.
Alleluia, joyful mother,
Zion’s* fellow oitizon,
Alleluia, voice of thy own
Citizens in blissful joy,
Of us exiles here the rivers
Of Great Babel* force our tears.
Alleluia, we unworthy are
To harp perpetually,
Alleluia, voice of rebirth*1
1 Lit. Jerusalem’s.
a Lit. of Babylon.
* Renatus, ? = spring, i.e. tho lont or spring season together with its
introductory days from Septuagesima onward.
114 THE QUEST
Makes us intermit [thy use];
For ’tis now the time when we must
Mourn offences of the past.
Wherefore Thee wo pray 0 blessdd
To-be-praised Trinity,
That Thou grant1 us vision of Thy
Paschal feast in aather-height;
Where to Thee we sing rejoicing
Alleluia without break. Amen.
Evening prayer, etc.
Antiphon at the Magnificat.
Tarry with us for this day, Alleluia, Alleluia; and on the
morrow thou shall sot forth from us, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia;
and when daylight shall have risen thou shalt go forth upon thy
ways, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.
Prayer.
0 God, who dost permit us to celebrate the solemnities of the
Alleluiatic song by bringing it down [to earth], grant us that we
may sing Alleluia in everlasting felicity, together with Thy saints
who sing in blessed joy unending Alleluia. Through our Lord, etc.
At Ma tin s.
Invitatory. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.
Hymn. Alleluia, song melodious, etc.
In the First Nocturn: Antipli. Alleluia.
f. I call to remembrance my song in the night [Ps. 776].
First Lection. In the beginning God created [Gen. l].
IJ.. 1. Alleluia, while she is present they entertain2 her, and
they greatly long for her while she withdraws herself.’ *And
for evermore [with head] *encrowncd she triumphs it before the
Lord, Alleluia.
1 Heading des for det.
1 Invitantur. Such a deponent form is never found ; it is evidently a
mistake for imitantur (cp. Amalar, p. 117 below).
s Dum so eduxerit; Amalar Has subduxerit (t'6.).
1 The inserted words aro ior the purpose of keeping the samo number of
syllables as in the Latin.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 115
f. In tho [blessed] friendship of the Lord she finds her
righteous pleasure, for as much as she is immortal in the sight of
Him. * And for evermore, etc.
15.. 2 . May the number of thy years be increased by the Lord,
Alleluia, mayest thou go forward by the road of wisdom. * And
by tho narrow way of righteousness mayest thou return to us,
Alleluia, Alleluia.
f. For thou alone dost hold the preeminence in the presence
of tho Lord; because of this, therefore, return into thy treasuries.*
And by the narrow way, etc.
15.. 3. Alleluia, alone thou hast the preeminence, etc. May
[all] tho angels sing thy praise. * For thou hast been well­
pleasing to the Lord, Alleluia, Alleluia.
f. May tho good angel of the Lord be thy companion and
make good disposition for thy joumeyings. * For, etc.
In the Second Nocturn : Antiph. Alleluia, Alleluia.
There follow the Lections from Genesis.
ty. 4. May tho good angel, etc., Alleluia, and make, etc.
* That again with rejoicing thou mayest return to us, Alleluia,
Alleluia.
May tho number of thy years, etc. * That again by tho
narrow way, etc.
ty. 5. Alleluia, roturn [therefore] into thy treasuries. * May
[all] the angels, etc.
ty. G
. Alleluia, O thou [most] righteous pleasuro in His
handiworks, creations of the Lord. * Thou riches manifold,
Alleluia, Alleluia.
. Beautiful hast thou been made, and sweetly pleasant in
many delights. * Thou riches manifold, etc.
In the Third Nocturn: Antiph. Alleluia.
Homily on the Gospel. The kingdom of heaven is like, etc.
I^. 7. A good name is rather [to be chosen] than many riches
[Prov. 2 2 i]. * [Yea,] beyond gold and topaz is good grace [to
bo reckoned], Alleluia, Alleluia.
$. Oh how sweet unto my throat aro Thy utterances, O Lord,
beyond honey and the honeycomb unto my mouth. * [Yea,]
beyond gold, etc.
4
116 THE QUEST
. 8. Alleluia, [avenge thou,] avenge thou my cause and set
thou me free, Alleluia, from them that calumniate me. * Alleluia.
f. Look thou upon my humility, and snatch me away, seeing
that I have not forgotten Thy law. * Alleluia.
15.. 9. Alleluia, tarry with us for this day, etc., Alleluia.
* And when daylight, etc., Alleluia, Alleluia.
?. May the good angel, etc. * And when daylight, etc.
At Lauds.
Antiph. We all are athirst, Alleluia, Alleluia.
Ps. The Lord is king. Rejoice. God.
Antiph. Let the earth give praise unto the Lord, and lot all
things that grow upon the earth utter a hymn, Alloluia, Alleluia.
Canticle. 0 all ye works, etc.
Antiph. Alleluia, thou alone dost hold preeminence, etc.;
because of this return, etc.; may [all] the angels, otc. Alleluia,
Alleluia.
Ps. Praise, etc.
Chapters, Hymn and, Antiph. at Benediction as above at First
Vespers.
[Nothing is indicated for Second Vespers and tho other hours.
The Ps. ‘Praise,’ etc., at Lauds was sung as follows :]
Alloluia, praise tho Lord down from tho heavens, sing praises
of Him in tho hoights, Alloluia. Sing forth the praises of tho Lord,
all His angols; sing forth His praises, all ye virtues of tho Lord,
Alleluia, Alleluia. Sing forth praise of Him, both sun and moon ;
sing praises of Him, 0 ye stars and light, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.1
But what was the meaning of this beautiful
service ? The following exposition of Amalar or
Amalaire, Deacon of the cathedral church of Metz, in
the 9th century, in his treatise on the Services of the
1 Lebouf informed the Benedictine editor of Dnfresno’s Glossary that
this office was also used in tho monastery of S. Gcrmauus at Auxcrro, in tho
9th century, according to the saint's own statement, in his Dc Miraculis
(1. i. c. 10), and also in the cathedral itself, as witnossed by a missal of tho
same date. In the antiphonaries of tho 14th and loth centuries, however, ho
found that tho office had been transferred from Scptuagesima to tho Feast
of S. Stephen, the patron saint of tho cathedral (i.e. to Dec. 26).
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 117
Church,1addressed to Louis the Pious, may orieut us
to some extent iu the right direction :
Amalar ox t h e Of f ic e fo r Se ptu a g esim a .
First we must note whose state has been celebrated from tho
Lord’s Nativity up to Septuagesima, and from Septuagesima to
the middle of Quadragesima [First Sunday in Lont]. Manifestly
Christ’s generation, and the nobility (or freedom, liberalitas) of the
holy preachers have been celebrated from the day of Christ’s
Nativity to Septuagesima, and from Septuagesima the generation
of those who long to be taken up out of bondage and from the
straits of the present sojourning, until again the birth of Christ is
renewed (renascatur) about the Paschal Sacraments. The genera­
tion of Christ and the nobility of his own [sons] have for tho moBt
part migrated from tho presont ago to reign together with tho
angels in tho presence of God. The time of this departure
(emigratio) is called the night, as the Lord says in the Gospel:
Tho night cometh when no man can work [Jn. 9<]. The present
Church which is in this sojourning, recalls to mind tho glory that
is celebrated among the citizens who have departed from it [sc. this
sojourning on earth]. In tho day, however, of those who are held
down in bondage and who sigh to return again to freedom—among
them, in sooth, who are fettered with tho sadness of captivity, tho
Alleluia splendour is not celebrated. But among those who have
passed forth [from bondage] Alleluia is celebrated, since they do
not withdraw from praise of God. In tho antiphonaries the first
respond runs : *Alleluia, while she is present, thoy imitate’ her.'
The good Amalar is puzzled at the gender. Why,
he asks, is Alleluia called ‘she ’ when it is a neuter
phase ? He, too, is ignorant, and yet he immediately
proceeds to call Alleluia the ‘chaste birthr’ or genera­
tion, *with splendour,’ that is, of course, regeneration
' Maxima Bibliotheca vet. Patt. et. antiq. Scripp. cccles. (ed. Margarin
de la Bigue, Lyons, 1577, fob), torn. 14 (containing writers from 800 to 840
a.d.). *Amalarii . . . de Ecdes. Officiis ' (pp. 934ff.); De Ordine
Antiplionarii Liber (pp. 103211.), cap. 80, ‘De Officio Scptuagetivuo'
(pp. 1047ff.).
3 Evidently the correct roading; thoy sing (and danco) with Alloluia.
118 THE QUEST
with glory or grace, the ‘spiritual birth,’ as he rightly
says (p. 1043a), and again ‘this is the fair and chaste
birth ’ (p. 1047h). With the rest of Amalar’s lengthy
and pious exegesis we need not trouble the reader.1
To attempt the lengthy task of tracing the origin
and evolution of the liturgical use of Alleluia in the
Christian Church is of course out of the question in
this restricted paper. The translation, however, of a
few quotations from prior authorities in the long
disquisition of Cardinal Joannes Bona, ‘De Allehija,’2
may be of service.
The mystery of Alleluia is as it were a dropping of a gentle
joy-rain from the riches of Jerusalem Above. . . . It betokens
the eternal life-communion of the angels and of blessed souls. It
is thus the propor expression of future beatitude, and is rightly
used with greatest frequency at the time when the risen Lord
gives us pledgo and hope and promise of that beatitude. In
uttering Alleluia wo jubilate rather than sing, for we prolong a
single syllable [sc. the final a] of this utterance into a number of
neume8 (neumas) or distinctions of modulation, in keeping with tho
exultation of tho saints in glory (pp. 471, 472—from Abbot Rupert
of Tuicioo in anciont Narbonne). Or more simply, the final a was
prolonged to great length, to signify that the joy of tho saints in
heaven was unending (p. 474—from S. Bonaventura, and p. 475—
from Richard of St. Victor). The modulation of the Alleluiatio
chant expresses the thanksgiving of the faithful to God, and their
sighing after eternal joys, for articulate human speech cannot
express what the mind is unablo to conceive, what God has
prepared for them that lovo Him (p. 474—from Stephen of
Burgundy). Jubilation that cannot be expressed in articulate
speech breaks forth. The Church offers this oblation to God when
1 It may, howover, bo of interest to note that the ordor of his responds
is different from that of tho Auxorre MSS.; that in glossing R ‘ Tarry with
us,’ etc., he treats us to a very arbitrary exegesis of a disjoined sentenco or
two from tho familiar yet strango old folk-talc iu Judges 19, and in glossing
I}. ‘May the good angel,’etc., to an equally arbitrary conflation of tho Greek
texts of Tobit 5 is, 16,20.21.
3 De div. Psalmodia . . . sive Psallentis Ecclcsiee Harmonia, c. 16 §7
(ed. nov., Cologne, 1677), pp. 471ff.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 119
she sings neumes (pncumata) or modulations without words in the
sacrifice of Lauds. For by this ‘vociferation ’ we represent those
good gifts to come, after the dissolution of the flesh, which cannot
he sot forth in words (pp. 474, 475—from Luko of Tuy in Spain).
There is much more in the learned cardinal’s
disquisition for which we have no space; but from all
of this later piety, interesting though it be in its own
way, we do not get a single hint of the historic origin
of tho ideas associated with the use of Alleluia in
Christian ritual; nor do we, as far as I am at present
aware, get any direct indications from the Church
Fathers. The phrase itself is of course Hebrew, and
it was used in the temple-service. But did the Rabbis
associate it with tho joys of tho New or Celestial
Jerusalem ? Of this I cannot as yet find any evidence.
Tho traces must be sought for, if happily they can be
found, in the influence of the astral lore of Babylon
and of such idoas as dominated the Wisdom and
Apocalyptic literature of Jewry. Wo thus enter the
domain of Hellenistic religion and the widespread
territory of the general Gnosis. In the present outline
there is space to note only the most general indications.
The sidereal religion or astral cult that was a
fundamental element of both Hellenistic theology and
Gnostic ecstasis posited the *harmony ’ (both Song
and dance) of the celestial spheres and the supposed
‘correspondence ’ between the constitution and soul
of tho universe and the life and composition of man.
In the soteriology or salvation-doctrine of the many
cults of the Gnosis, the human soul was regarded as
being in exile from its heavenly home; it was
mythologised in the Christianised forms as the fallen
Sophia or Wisdom, who was rescued or redeemed by
the Saviour, the Christ, her heavenly spouse. Or,
120 THE QUEST
again, the incarnated soul must dance in harmony
with the stars and so rebocome a star, a god. On its
way above it gradually shed its earthly tendencies, and
so, reclothed with celestial virtues, or reendowed with
the movement of the celestial harmony, it rejoined the
choirs above. The bride of the Christ was either the
whole Church of the faithful or the individual perfected
Christian soul. Now the Harmony of Generation or tho
supposed astral schematic determination of physical
birth and death was called, in a number of systems
of the Hellenistic and Christianised Gnosis, the
Hebdomad,1 and the Harmony of Regeneration or
spiritual birth and life was termed the Ogdoad, Heavenly
Jerusalem, Mother Above, and by various other names.
To quote two passages out of many. First we have
the request of the just illumined neophyte in the
Trismegistic Secret Sermon on the Mount:
I would, 0 father, hear the praise-giving with hymn which
thou didst say thou lieardest then when thou wert at the Eight
[the Ogdoad] of Powers.*
This refers to the following passage from the
famous Poimcindrcs or Shepherd of Men treatise :
And then with all the energizings of the [Lower] Harmony
stripped from him, clothed in his proper power, he cometh to
that nature which belongs unto the Eight, and there with thoso-
that-are hymneth tho Father !*
If we now turn to the ritual, called ‘The Hymn of
Jesus ’ in the Ac£s of John, we read:
The Ogdoad harps with us as one harp. Amen.
1 Soo Wilhelm Boussct, Hauptproblcmc der Gnosis (Gottingen, 1007),
Die Sieben und die Mij-n)p,' pp. 9-58.
1 Corp. Herm. xiii. 15 (Mead, Hermes, ii. 223).
8 Corp. Hcrm. i. 26 (Mead, ii. 16).
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 121
The Dodccad above doth dance [with tie]. Amen.
The whole on high is a-dance.1
And a line or two before, and most important of
all: “ Grace leadetk the dance.” Grace is "Wisdom,
the Sophia, the Ogdoad, the Heavenly Jerusalem, the
Mother, Glory, Splendour, Regeneration. Grace is
Alleluia.
Here, I believe, wo have an early link with the
Allcluiatic Office of the middle ages—a link of enormous
strength, of which the above rough indications will
perhaps give the reader unfamiliar with the very
extensive literature of the subject, but little idea. I
point to it, however, with some assurance as one of
the main moments in the heredity of Alleluia.
As to the ceremony of the burial and wailing for
Alleluia, it is hardly necessary to remind the reader of
the familiar rites of the cult of Osiris-Attis-Adonis,
traces of the probable survival of which in other
forms have been of late discovered in customs of the
mediaeval church.2
But what of the Alleluia whipping-top ? What
connection can a childish game possibly have with the
sublimity of Alleluia ? It will be remembered that in
the Theseus labyrinth-dance, the dancers- were driven,
and probably scourged, round the altar (p. 97 n. 2,
above). Now the whipping-top was one of the *play­
things ’ of the young Bacchus, or Iacchos, whose cult
was syncretised with the famous Eleusinian Mysteries.
There is no space here to labour the point; that would
mean another article.3 Setting aside the rest of the
1 Hymn o f Jesus (Mead), p. 82.
3 See J. G. Frazer, .Mont's Attis Osiris (London, 190C), ]>p. 198ff.
5 For a preliminary sketch of tho subject, see ‘ The Playthings of
Bacchus,’ in the writer's Orjihais (Loudon, 1890), pp. 21911.; tho first and
still indispensable scientific study is C. A. Lobock’s Aylaophamus sivo de
Tiiooloyitc mysticiz Causis (Konigsbcrg, 1829), i. C99C., ‘Ha Zagrei
Crepundiis.’
122 THE QUEST
‘playthings,’1which were all, I believe, regarded as sym­
bols of the modes of the ever-young creative life, or of
the ‘sport’of the deity, a note or two on the whipping-
top (po/xpos, turbo2
) may be of special interest. The name
rhorribos, which in geometry was assigned to a body
composed of two cones joined together on equal bases,8
was given to a number of similarly-shaped objects,
such as a distaff, a spindlo, a top (toupie), and what is
now called a diabolo. In the mystery-playthings the
rhombos or turbo, as a top which was whipped, must
be distinguished from the spinning or humming top
(o~rpo/3i\oi).
I venture to suggest that the whipping-top of the
mysteries was feigned to symbolise in its spinning tho
motion of the erratic spheres or seven planets, and the
humming top that of the eighth sphere of tho so-called
fixed stars. This hypothesis is borne out by the
famous myth of Plato known as ‘The Vision of Er,"
where ho describes the cosmic ‘Spindlo of Necessity ’
and its eight whorls (the harmony and music of tho
spheros), with the heaven pole or axis through tho
whole, on which it spins. I thus am emboldened to
think that Alleluia could have very well been suggested
1 It may, however, bo noted that they included ‘dice,' and that Durand
(p. 101 above) tells us that the prelates and clergy used to play at dice at
Christmas nnd Easter.
2 Unfortunatoly the art 1turbo,' which is to deal at length with tho
Bubjcct, has not yet been reached in Dcrenbtirg and Saglio's Did. <
1
. Anliqq.
grcc. d rom. There is, however, something to our purpose in E. Saglio’s art.
'rhombos,' though tho special subject of the •Playthings of Bacchus'is not
referred to.
* Fig. 3087, elscwliero in tho Dictionary, reproduces a vase-painting of a
girl whipping a top, which is formed of two truncated cones, with tho
smaller piano surfaces (not tho bases) joined together; the top spins on a
woodon peg in the centre of the inferior base.
1 Rep. x. 616 nff.; for a translation and notes see the Prolegomena in the
writer’s Hermes i. 4-10ff.
CEREMONIAL GAME-PLAYING 128
by the ‘sacred ’ symbol of the whipping-top.1 More­
over the ceremonial top of Auxerre had Alleluia painted
round it in golden letters. Now in antiquity the seven
vowels were assigned to the seven spheres, and it was a
widespread custom to use these vowels alono in
liturgical chanting. Combinations and permutations
of these vowels occur with the greatest frequency in
the Magical Papyri and allied documents, and may in
some cases be the remains of a very ancient musical
notation. At any rate Demetrius tells us categorically:
In Egypt the priests hymn the gods by means of the seven
vowels, chanting them in order; instead of the pipe and lute the
musical chanting of these letters are heard. So that if you were
to take away the accompaniment you would simply remove the
whole melody and music of the utterance {logos)?
There may possibly be some echo of this in the
modulation of the final a of Alleluia, aud a musical
antiquarian may somo day, perhaps by an analysis of
the old modes of the Alleluia music,3recover some of
these ancient vowel-chants.
In any case, I vonture to hope that the above
suggestions have set up some finger-posts for further
research, and that they may have brought the puzzles of
the ball-dance of Auxerre and the Alleluia whipping-
top one step nearer a probable solution. In tho next
paper I propose to deal chiefly with the Bergeretta of
Besan£on. G. R. S. Mead.
1 It is here further to be noted that Lebeuf (p. 2667), in describing tho
MS. of Sens that contained the Office of the Feast of Fools, from which he
quotes a very peculiar Alleluia, says that the diptychs which contained this
extraordinarily beautiful MS. were inlaid with two panels of ivory, yellow
with ago, on which were to bo seen tho figures of bacchanals, of tho goddess
Ceres in her car, of Cybele, the mother of tho gods, etc.; all of which is
reminiscent of the Magna Mater mysteries and of the Elcusinia.
3 On Interpretation, c. 71 (p. 20 Raderin.). Cp. the writer’s Mithriac
Ritual (Echoes from the Gnosis, vi., London, 1907), p. 14 ct pass.
5 Cp. e.g. Lebeuf (who among his other accomplishments was sub-cantor
of tho-cathedral), Traiti historique et vratique sur le Chant ecclcsiastique
(Paris, 1741).
CEREMONIAL DANCES AND SYMBOLIC
BANQUETS IN MEDIAEVAL
CHURCHES.
T he E ditor.
Continuing our researches into the subject of cere­
monial dancing in church in the late middle ages,1we
pass to a consideration of the Bergeretta of Besa^on,
of which our chief source of information is an anony­
mous Letter to the Mercure de France of September,
1742.2
T h e B ergeretta of B esancon.
Bergeretta was the name not only of a potion or
cup of spiced wine, but also of a ceremonial dance
which was celebrated in the canonical churches of the
diocese of Besan9on on the afternoon of Easter-day up
to 1738.8
The writer of the Letter is correct in thinking
that the repast or sacred meal, at which the cup was
drunk, and which was associated with this dance,
derived from the pious festivities of earlier centuries.
1 Soo the article on 1Ceremonial Game Playing and Dancing in Mediaeval
Churches ’ in the last number, and for a general introduction, which includes
a rapid survey of liturgical dancing in the early centuries as well as in the
later period, see ‘ The Sacred Dance of Jesus ’ in The Quest for October,
1910.
1 Op. cit. pp. 1930ff. Tho title reads: ‘Letter written from Besancon
on a late Latin Term and on an Ecclesiastical Danco which was performed
there on Easter Day.’ This communication is dated from Besancon, July 4
of the same year. I have not been able to identify the learned writer, but
ho was indubitably ono of tho canons of the cathedral.
8 Or indeed even later, for some vestiges of it still existed in 1742 in the
collegiate church of S. Anatoile de Salms (p. 1930).
249
Jan. 1913.
250 THE QUEST
These had been preserved most conspicuously in the
Church of Rome, as witnessed in its 12th century
ordines; and the writer thinks that Besangon had
derived its custom from Rome owing to the general
similarity of its old ordinaries with the ancient Roman
rituals (p. 1931). As for the dance, however, the Letter
becomes apologetic and ascribes its introduction to the
degeneracy of later times. Such dancing, it thinks, was
a total misconception of the originally dignified motions
and gestures of joy of the Israelites after the Passage
of the Red Sea or of David before the ark, which were,
it supposes, not dances but spontaneous expressions
of rejoicing (pp. 1938, 39). The insufficiency and
historical inaccuracy of this apologetic view, however,
have been already pointed out in the. previous two
papers, and so we may pass on. The Letter continues:
Yes, MM. the canons and chaplains of our canonical churches
used to foot it together in round dances in the cloisters, and even
in the sacred edifices themselves when bad weather did not allow
them to dance on tho paths or turf of the cloisters—a performance
which could not havo failed to provide the spectators with an
entertainment of the most comical and ludicrous hind.
Those dances, however, could not have been of so
comical a nature, for they are recorded without apology
of any sort in the ancient rituals of Besangon, and
chiefly in those of the collegiate church of Ste. Marie
Magdaleine. For instance, in a book of rites of this
church dated 1582, in tho chapter on Easter-day, we
havo the following statement in Latin :
After dinner (prandium), at the end of tho sermon, and when
nones are over, there are dances (chorea) in tho cloister, or in the
middle of the nave of tho church if it is rainy weather; they are
danced to certain airs contained in the processional [chant-books].
After tho dance . . . there follows tho repast (collatio) in tho
chapter-house (p. 1989).
CEREMONIAL DANCES 251
In another ordinary, written only some eighty years
before the Letter to the Mercure was penned, i.e. about
1662, we read almost in tho same words in Latin :
After dinner, and when the sermon is over, MM. the canons
and chaplains, holding hands, perform a dance in the cloister, or
in tho middle of tho nave of the church if it is rainy weather.
Afterwards they go to the chapter-house, and there follows the
repast (p. 1940).
The Letter then proceeds to contend that the
Latin term bergeretta (Fr. bcrgcrettc) was originally
the name of this dance and not of the cordial or
beverage (liqueur ou boisson) that was served at the
repast or banquet which followed. It was only later
on that the term bergeretta was extended to this
ceremonial drink. For in a ritual written about 1400,
this cup is called pigmentum aud not bcrgcrettc, as in
the passago:
After singing they go to tho chapter-house to the repast
which consists of pigmentum and wine.
Now pigmentum, tho writer continues, was used
in late Latin for a sort of hippocras, a cordial made of
wine, sugar aud different spices, which was not only in
great favour at jollifications among the laity, but also
a special beverage of the clergy, who were regaled with
it on certain feast-days (p. 1940).1 But a repast that
consisted of nothing hut hippocras and wine seems on
tho face of it a somewhat strange meal for sober folk.
I suggest, therefore, that though there certainly was a
ceremonial cup on Easter-day, in the above passage
pigmentum may mean something else, namely, as we
1 For instance, ho tells us, at Ste. Mario Magdaleine's on Christmas-day
a quantity of hippocras was served out to tho canons who hnd taken part in
the Mass of tho Aurora, according to tho following item in the ancient
accounts of the said church : “ For Christmas hippocras served out to MM.
the canons who attended the Mass of the Dawn. 80 tow,"
252 THE QUEST
shall see later on from other examples, spiced bread or
cake.
In any case, the writer is evidently right in con­
tending that the term hcvcjcretla was first of all the
name of the dance. What, however, is its derivation ;
how did it come to be so used ? Here we are left to
conjecture. It may have been originally, the author
supposes, the name of the airs to which certain hymns
(or rather certain rhymed and cadenced or trilled
sequences) were sung, while the clergy were dancing.
These airs, he further conjectures, were probably the
tunes of rustic songs of the period called bcrgerettcs,1
which were adapted to the text of the hymns. Or
again, the term may have come, he hazards, from the
name of the composer of the airs. All this is very
unsatisfactory, and I should myself conjecture that the
sound-association with bcrgcr (shepherd) has uncon­
sciously (for no direct derivation is even hinted at by
the writer or the dictionary) suggested the whole of
the rustic pastoral idea. However, the writer makes a
point of the fact that, in the above-quoted ordinary of
1400, the hymns are called ‘songs ’ in the rubric:
After nones the choir goes to the lawn (pratum) of the cloister,
and there are sung the songs (cantilena) of the resurrection, etc.
(p. 1941).
Of these dance-songs or airs there were four; each
consisting of several couplets, with repetitions arranged
to suit the dance. These songs tvere preceded by an
anthem or antiphon of the seventh mode which served
as a prologue; it was, however, sung to a most
eccentric air, as foreign (barbarc) to the words as were
the following ‘hymns,’ one of which was also of the
seventh mode. That we may bo left in no doubt, the
1 The later editions of Dufresne's Glossary (s.v.) adopt this speculation,
and gloss bergeretta as a 1pastoral song.’
OEREMONIAL DANCES 253
writer proceeds to give us the words and music of
one of these Latin songs, which lie found in a
MS. service book upwards of 300 years old (p. 1G43).1
They are as follows :
si si la sol la ut ut ut ut si la si
Fi de li um so net vox so bri — — a.
si si la sol la ut nt ut ut si la si
<
:Con vert cr e Si on in gau di — — a.
si si la sol la ut ut ut ut si la sol
Sit om ni um u na Ice ti ti a
ufc re ro sol la ut ut si la sol fa sol
Quos u ni ca rc dc tnit gra ti — — a.
si si la sol la ut ut ut ut si la si
'Con vert er c Si on in gau di — — a.2
The notation of the MS. was in the usual form
used for plain-song; tho arrangement of the air,
however, was in keeping with a branle or dance in
pairs, one pair leading the rest.3
Apparently tho dance bore no distinctive name in
the service books; but Jean Millet, in his Memoires,*
compiled in 1653, in dealing with the Easter-day
ceremonies, states categorically that the ‘procession ’
(that is to say the ‘three turns ’ in the cloister to
which, as we shall see, the dance had at that date been
degraded) was called bergcrette (p. 1944).
But Besangon was not the only place where dances
1 This MS. had been presented to the cathedral by a canon named Hugh
de Vilfete, a member of a well-known Bosan^on family, at the beginning of
tho 15th century.
J Let the sober voice of the faithful sound.
*Turn round and about O Sion with joy.
Let there bo but one rejoicing of all
Who have been redeemed by one only grace.
♦Turn rouud and about 0 Sion with joy.
* Cp. Quest, vol. iv. no. 1, p. 100 n. 1.
* These dealt with the ceremonial which was still in force in tho
cathedral up to 1742. Millet was canon and sub-cantor of the cathedral and
a great cojinoisseur of church music.
254 THE QUEST
of this or a similar nature were practised. For, after
referring to the already-quoted statement in Durand’s
Rationale,l our Letter (p. 1944) reproduces part of a
passage from the section on the observances at vespers
on the Day of Pentecost by *Dom Martenne,’2 the full
text of which reads :
In former- days in some churches after vespers there were
dances (chorea) on the lawn (pratcllum), as at Limogc-s. The
ordinary of Chalons [sur Sadno] makes tho following reference to
this dance: “ After complin tho dance (chorus) on the lawn takes
place. Tho dean sings the first chant: ‘Come Holy Ghost ’; the
rest [of the clergy] are allowed to sing their own [songs] if they
like, but in Latin.”
From this we learn presumably the first words of
the introductory ‘anthem ’ at Besai^on, and that the
dance song and ceremony was a fairly wide-spread
custom, but whether or not it was generally called
bergeretta, as at Besai^on, we have no means of ascer­
taining. At Limoges, moreover, in addition to this
general dance, there was also a famous special dance in
the choir of the Church of St. Martial, the apostle of
Limousin, which was kept up till the middle of the
17th century. Of this service of dance Pierre Bonnet
gives us the following information :s
[On the feast-day of tho saint] the people performed a
round dance in the choir of the church, and at the end of every
psalm, instead of chanting Gloria Patri, they used to sing in the
vernacular: “ St. Martial pray for us, and wo will dance for you.”*
The custom was subsequently abolished.
1 Cp. Quest, loc. tup. cit. p. 101.
7 That is Ed. Martftne, De antiquis Ecclesiic Ritibus, 1. 4, c. 27, § 18;
(od. nov., Venice, 1788), vol. 3, p. 195b.
3 Histoire generals de la Danse sacree et profane (Paris, 1724), p. 45.
This single passage is the parent authority for all subsequent statements on
the subject.
* I havo noted several variations of tho original words; the moat
authentic reading, however, is to be found in Gaston Vouillcr’s La Danse
Paris, 1898), p. 37 : “ San Martiou, pregas per nous et nous ebingaren (or
espingaren) per bou3."
CEREMONIAL DANCES 255
But though the writer of our Letter begins his
account with evoking a picture of the comical and
ludicrous, and proceeds to stress the secular nature of
the airs of the songs accompanying the dance, he
shows himself later on very jealous of the reputation
of Besamjon, and contends that the bcrgerctta was
always danced in the sacred edifices with becoming
modesty, for the records clearly showed that from of
old the metropolitan chapter was very particular and
quite a model to other dioceses in such matters (pp.
1945, 46). In any case, as he conjectures, after the
strong condemnation of abuses connected with these
and similar ceremonies in the churches, by the councils
of Vienne and Bale in the 15th century, the Easter-
day dancing in the actual churches themselves of the
diocese of Besan^on ceased.1 Nevertheless the old
custom had such strong hold that it could not be
entirely eradicated; it was accordingly reduced to
making several circuits (tours) in the cloisters only,
and instead of the dance (branlc) airs the hymn of
Lactantius, ‘Hail Festal Day,’ etc., was used. For in
a book of rites, written in French, about the beginning
of the 16th century, in use at St. Stephen’s, we are
told:
After nones, the clergy assemble in the cloister, with the
singers to chant the music. The choir begins Salva Festa Dies
and MM. respond Qua Dcus, going [in procession] round the
cloister. Then the choir sings again [Qua Dcus), and MM. sing
back the other verse Salva Festa Dies. Thus these two verses are
sung alternately by MM., who make the circuit of the cloister
three times.
1 That this, however, was not the case in all the churches of the diocese,
may be seen from the fact that, in spito of tho most vigorous synodal
diocesan decrees, of 1585 and 1601, which threatened tho severest penalties
against the enthusiasts who ventured to keep up the ancient custom, the
dance was still in full force at Sto. Marie Magdaleine’s, and danced in the
nave in rainy weather, up to at least 1662 (p, 1947 and cp. p. 251 above).
5
256 THE QUEST
Other somewhat earlier ordinaries of the same
cathedral church, in Latin, are to the same effect.
An ordinary in French, however, of the year 1647,1
fortunately gives us some further interesting details of
the remains of the ancient custom, which lead the
writer of the Letter to suppose erroneously that the
dancing had at that date been ‘re-established.’ Never­
theless though this account gives us no direct infor­
mation about the famous dance, it does indirectly, I
think, allow us to conjecture how one or more of its
figures may have been formed. For in the article
headed *For the Easter Dances,’ in the chapter on
‘The Easter Festival ’of this ordinary, we read :
Nones are said, and then all go to the cloister, and take hold
of one another; the small [est] choir-boy walks first and holds the
cope’ of the oldest canon, and thus following one another they
make three circuits round the cloister (p. 1948).
So they walked it at St. Stephen’s, in 1647, by
which time the dance had become a simple procession ;
but even this procession was suppressed in 1738 (p.
1953). This relic of the old custom was performed for
the last time in 1737, and as the writer of the Letter
was probably an eye-witness of the ceremony, the
description he gives of the last vestiges of the ancient
rite are of additional interest. He writes:
At one o’clock in the afternoon the ceremony was announced
by the ringing of the smaller bells and of the great bell in peals.
A lesson was read in choir consisting of the rest of the homily for
matins. Nones were then sung, and after this the bcrgercttc
1 Edited by Nicolas Billaret, who was canon and sub-cantor of St.
Stephen's.
5 As to this, wc learn from a note appended to the Letter that: “ The
canons of the metropolitan church of Besanfon have the privilege of wearing
in choir the alb [or surplice] and violet cope [generally a richly embroidered
mantle] like that of bishops. They call it cappe from the Latin cuppa. In
winter it is lined with ermine and in summer with crimson taffeta. This
privilege was granted them by l’ope Paul V., by a bull dated July 1, 1609."
CEREMONIAL DANCES 257
began in the following order. The oldest dignitary walked first by
himself, followed by a choir-boy who carried the end of the former’s
cope. All the other canons came next, one after the other, each
of them followed by a little page bearing the train of his cope.
[Then] after the sub-cantor camo two chaplains who walked
together. They all passed into the cloister, of which they made
three circuits—in rainy weather under the arches. Meantime,
the musicians, grouped in one of the corners of the cloister, played
and sang a kind of Latin canticle, beginning: ‘On this day of
God, let the Galileans now say how the Jews did to death their
King,’ etc.1 The two chaplains repeated the same couplets in
plain-song. On completing the three circuits, they sang the
‘Rejoice, Queen of Heaven,’ and intoned the psalms Miserere and
Dc Profundis for [the soul of] a canon of St. Stephen’s, named
Hugues Gamier, who was the founder of the repast5(pp. 1958, 54).
If these two accounts of the relic of the ancient
ceremony are compared, it will be seen that they differ
somewhat from one another. In the later description
the company is divided into couples, canons and
choristers, paired in inverse order of dignity or
seniority, the oldest and youngest leading. It is
possible, I suggest, that this procession from choir to
cloister may be the remnant of one of the figures of
the original dance in the choir itself; for, as we saw in
the last paper (p. 97 n. 2), Pollux tells us that the
labyrinth-dance, or at any rate one of its figures, was
danced by two rows of performers one over against the
other, the end of either file being taken by the leaders.
Moreover, as the privilege of the cope was not granted
to tho cauons of Besamjon till 1009, the train-bearing
1 This must have been a very ancient piece, for it was only in tho
earliest centuries that the Christians were called Galileans.
a This cannot mean that Hugues Gamier originated the repast, but that
he was a beuefactor who hail left a certain sum of money for defraying its
expenses. Prior to his bequest the expense of the bcrgcrcttc banquet had
most probably been defrayed in the same way as that of t\iopclotc of Auxerre,
as described in the last paper, namely by the last newly-received canon for
the time being.
258 THE QUEST
most probably formed no part of the original ceremony.
As, however, wo know from the pelote dance at Auxerre
that the canons there covered their heads with the
poke of their amices during the ceremony, as described
in the last paper, and as the amice had two ends
hanging down behind, it may be that originally the
choristers took hold of these 1streamers ’ in the dance.
If we now turn to the earlier account, wo may at
first sight interpret the ‘taking hold of one another ’
as meaning simply that the choir-boys took hold of
the copes of the canons, and the walking first of the
smallest chorister as simply noting the reversal of the
usual order of procession of the choir-boys among
themselves. But as they do not *take hold of one
another ’ until they get to the cloister, this account
may possibly refer to a different arrangement from the
train-bearing procession composed of couples. That
this is not purely conjectural is seen from the ordinary
of 16G2 (p. 251 above), where it is distinctly stated that
the canons *held hands ’ in the dance. If then the
canons held hands, they were grouped together in
some figure, and this could have been none other than a
ring or circle, as we hav^previously learned, and as in
the dance in the ‘Hymn of Jesus ’ in The Acts of John.
I even venture to think that the vague phrase ‘holding
hands ’ may stand for a still more elaborate figure of
the original dance : The canons held hands in a ring;
behind them was a second ring composed of choir­
boys, each paired with a canon, while in the centre
was the chief dignitary, the senior in rank, with the
smallest chorister in attendance. After this the circle
broke up, and the oldest and youngest led the way in a
serpentine or labyrinthine dance, which had finally
degenerated into the three circuits of the cloister. If
CEREMONIAL DANCES 259
these conjectures are in any way legitimate, we should
thus recover traces of three figures of the ancient
dance of the choros, or dancing-band or company, in
the orchestra, or dancing place, in the church itself.
As to the probable nature and origin of the
bcrgcrctte or ceremonial dance of Besangon, therefore,
I see no insurmountable difficulty in classing it
generally with the iielote of Auxerre, and assigning to
it the same conjectural heredity.
The ball-dance of Auxerre, the ball-throwing at
Narbonne and elsewhere, and the round-dance at
Besangon and in other dioceses, however, were severally
parts only of an ancient Easter rite, for thoy wei’e all
closely associated with a ceremonial repast or sacred
meal. And as this essay would not bo complete
without some account of its nature and probable
origin, we will begin with a description of the collatio
or merenda (or commessation) at Auxerre and Narbonne
which was omitted from the previous paper.
T h e G r o l ia o f A u x e r r e .
The Latin MS. from wlj^ich Lcbeuf1extracted the
oldest account of Wicpelota ceremony, informs us that
at the repast or banquet:
All the canons of the chapter, as well as tho chaplains and
officials, together with certain of the more distinguished citizens,
used to sit on benches in the ‘corona’ [? the chapter-house] or
in the orchestra [in the cathedral itself], and all without exception
were served with wafers,1 altar-breads,8 sweetmeats,4 and cakes,5
1 Loe. cit. p. 922; cp. Quest, vol. iv. no. 1, p. 98.
3 Nebulie (Fr. nieulea or niulct), very thin cakes or biscuits.
* Oblatte (Fr. oubUes or oublies), U R ed both for tho consecrated hosts and for
similar very thin broads. In feudal times, on certain days, such oblatcs wero
offered by vassals and subordinates to their lords ; this custom was subse­
quently changed to the payment of a small sum of money. Cp. Dufresne
(».v. ‘oblate quoting from Martinius (Tract, de antiq. Ecclet. Ditciplina in
div. Officii* cclebranda, p. 311), who, in treating of the Lord's Supper, refers
260 THE QUEST
and the rest of the pastries, together with a stew of minced and
seasoned hoar, venison and hare; and white and red wine was
served, but in temperato and modest quantities, that is to say, the
cups were filled thrice. During the repast the reader intoned a
festal homily from the chair or pulpit [according as the meal was
taken in the chapter-house or nave].
It further appears that this banquet was known
as grolia or la gvoice.1 For a Latin statute of 1553, in
the cathedral archives of Auxerre, ran as follows2:
Seeing that it has been the custom at the yearly solemn
festivals . . . that the repast (rcfectio) called la grolie should
be provided, and seeing that this custom has been omitted by
certain, it was resolved that a newly-received canon who has not
yet provided the said repast of bread and wine, called la grolie,
shall be required to make arrangements for it and supply the said
refection, which shall consist of at least bread and wine, and if he
likes of more provisions.
From this we learn that the repast was a feature
not only of the famous Easter pelota ceremony, but
also of the great feasts of the year; that it had been
neglected, probably on the score of expense, if the
account of the good fare in the above-quoted Latin MS.
is typical, and that the reform threw back to the
minimum, the original simplest custom of partaking
together of bread and wine in common, in which
connection it is important to note the phrase in the
MS. “ all without exception were served.” Now in the
case of the pelota ceremony this common meal was
to an ancient custom in the cathedral of Kesancon as follows: “ Meantime,
while a hymn is being sung, unleavened breads, wafers and oblates are
brought in and blessed by the bishop or dean, thus: ‘Bless, O Lord, this
creature of bread,’etc."
* DeUariola, small sweets or confectioneries.
s Fructeta, a word of uncertain meaning; may be tarts.
1 Bartlnileray (op. cil. loc. cit. p. -151, n. 1) says that there was a dainty
called grolie or roulec still in vogue in Burgundy in his day. i.e. 1855.
2 See Dufresnc (*.r. *grolia’ = Fr. groslce, grolce), who gives the
efcrence Probat. Hist. A lilies, p. 221, col. 1.
CEREMONIAL DANCES 261
served in the church itself; it was, therefore, originally
not a lay banquet, but a sober, though festive, cere­
monial repast; modesty and sobriety were strictly
enjoined, and the age-long custom of the community-
meal (ccenobium), from the days of the Essenes onward,
was kept up with the lection of the homily of the day
(originally a portion of scripture), during the meal,
from the MS. TIomiliary, as we are told by Lebeuf,
who probably had had the very volume in his hands.
Lebeuf concludes by saying that in his day (1726), not
only the very name pclote was unknown to the people,
though still in use among the clergy for a certain
annual money payment made to them, but that the
public had lost all memory of the original meaning of
the term roulee or grolee as well, though it was still in
use for certain presents given to the children at Easter
(p. 925).
The E aster Meal at Narbonne.
The Latin rubric in a 15th century MS. of Nar­
bonne1unfortunately gives us but a meagre account of
the Easter Monday banquet which was at that date
celebrated in the archbishop^palace, but anciently in
all probability in the cathedral itself. The pertinent
sentence of this rubric reads :
There tables are to be laid, and the servants of the archbishop
are to serve spiced bread* with other dishes, and wine to follow.
Here the Latinpigmcntum which I have translated
1 Cp. Quest, ibid. p. 101.
5 Pigmcntum, lit. simply any kind of spice. In late Latin, as wo have
already seen, tho term was also used for a sweet and fragrant drink made of
wino, honey and different spices (cp. s.v. Maigno d'Arnis, Lex. ad Script,
med. ct inf. Lat., Paris, 1858). But, as has already been pointed out in
another case (p. 251 above), pigmcntum can scarcely mean a drink or cordial
or hippocras in this instance, for it is classed with other diihes. Ypocrasium,
hypocrass or hippocras, was originally a medical cordial of wine and spices,
called after the famous physioian Hippocrates. Pigmcntum is here most
probably simply pain d'ipices, later with us tho homely gingerbread.
2G2 THE QUEST
by ‘spiced broad’ is a difficulty; it seerus to mo,
however, to be supported by a comparison with the
‘dishes ’ of the Auxerre grolcc and further reinforced
by the following information.
T h e E a s t e r R e p a s t o f N e v e r s .
In the loth century ordinary of the church of
Nevers, the following interesting regulation was to be
read:
On the second Easter festival [i.e. Easter Monday], before
vespers as o d Easter-day. On tho return of the procession, ‘ Say
unto us, Mary ’ is sung at tho font. And if thero ho any newly-
received canons, they have to provide good wine and pastries1 in
tho chapter-house for tho whole choir [i.e. presumably canons,
chaplains and choristers], and it is then [i.e. after singing at the
font] that the procession goes there.'1
What these ‘pastries ’ were is somewhat of a
puzzle. Lebcuf (p. 490) thiuks that the term chcnctcllus
is deserving of a place in Dufresne’s Glossary, and
conjectures that it was a ‘dainty,’ something like an
oblate or waffle (gaufre) of tho same shape as what in
several places were still called echcnots or cchcncz;
what this shapo was, hoover, ho does not say.
T h e A s c e n s io n D ay C o l l a t io n o f T o u l .
The Latin statutes of the chapter of Toul, on the
Moselle, however, which enumerate the meals (‘colla-
1 Chenetelli. Tho forms chenetrellus and cltenellui arc also found.
* Lebcuf, ibul. p. 495. In the archrcology of tbo processional, th e1pomp ’
or ‘procession ’ of the choros played a prominent part, both in the theatre
and also in the mysteries. Processionals, that is processional dances, were ono
of tho technical terms of choral dancing, us may be seen from the list which
Philo gives of tho sacred dances of tho Thorapeuts (Philo, D. V.C. x i; P. 902,
M. 484, Conybeare, pp. 127ff.). In this connection it is of interest to note
that Dufresne («.t>.) gives ns one of tho meanings of chorea (dance) the “ tour
(ambitus) of tho choir [or company] generally to the different chapels and
shrines,” and also of “ the procession made round the choir "—i.e. originally
tho dancing-place.
CEREMONIAL DANCES 26S
tions ’) the canons still took in common in the 15th
century, though recording nothing distinctive for
Easter, give the following noto on the repast that was
taken at the bishop’s palace on Ascension Day:
At this meal in former times they drank out of cups of madre,
and largo hosts, chcnetrelli and apples wore eaten.1
Now if, as wo shall see later, the shape of some of
these eatables was most probably symbolical, seeing
that the hosts were round and the apples spherical,
the remaining and distinctive cakes or pastries, con­
fectioneries or tarts, should pre-supposedly also have
had some special shape. This conjecture is justified
by an item of information in the later editions of
Dufresne (s.v. 1chenetrellus where we are told that a
triangular or three-cornered pastry (or tart), called
ecliaudd in French, was still (i.e. in the forties of the
eighteenth century) known as canesteau in Belgium.
T h e E a s t e r R e p a s t s a t B e s a n ^o n .
We now return to Besan§on and to the Letter to
the Mercure de France of September, 1742. The ritual
of Besan9on was of comparatively early date. Though
the earliest existing form waDa redaction of the 11th
century when Hugo I. was archbishop (p. 1946), the
original rite was said to go back to the days of
St. Protadius, the twenty-fourth bishop of Besangon,
o. 612—624 a .d . (p. 1935). In this 11th century ritual
it is stated th a t:
On Easterday tlio archbishop used to invito his clorgy to
dinner" (not only thS canons of the cathedral, but also those of
1 Lebeuf, loc. cit. p. 496.
1 Originally, doubtless, in the cathedral itself. The far-off echoes of this
ancient custom still continued at Besai^on in 1742, and the writer of the
Letter regards them as tbo vestiges of the common life which was formerly
so religiously observed in the ancient chapters of tlio diocese. At all tho
pontifical feasts, tho archbishop invited the canons of the cathedral to dinner.
264 THE QUEST
the other collegiate churches who had in those days to assist at
the episcopal mass). When all wore seated at the table, the first
ceremony was the blessing of a roast lamb.1 Thereafter the vicar-
general enjoined the verse, 1Let us feast with unleavened bread,’
etc., and all continued [with him in this grace] with much
modesty. Then dinner was served and eaten while they listened
to the lection. After dinner they went to church to return thanks
and sang nones. After nones they went to the cloister and there
washed their hands, and each was given to drink (pp. 1935, 36).
It was after this, as we have seen above (p. 251)
that the ancient bcrgerctte dance took place, and there­
fore we have to distinguish between this dinner
(prandium) and the repast or supper (collatio) that
followed. With regard to tho latter, it is to be noted
that the Latin ritual of Ste. Marie Magdaleiue’s, dated
1582, states that this repast was then served in the
chapter-house—
together with red wino and claret5and apples called carpendus in
tho vernacular (p. 1989).
In another Latin ordinary of the same church,
dated about 1GG2, we aro told that at this banquet:
They drink thrice and carpcndu apples (poma carpcndorum)
are distributed (p. 1940).
Though in the MS. Jjgtin ritual of about 1400 (cp.
p. 251 above) there is montion of spiced bread and wine
only, it is ovident that, as at Toul (p. 2G2 above), the
At four of jtheso festivals, namely Christmas, Easter, Pentecost, and the feast
of St. John the Evangelist, tho prelate had to give a dinner to tho music
master and eight choir-boys. On the samo occasions the dignitaries and
canons had similarly to give a dinner to tho chaplains, who were at Besan^on
called familiers, and to tho musicians. Theso lattor repasts were called let
hdtes; but in tho writer's time they had for several years been commuted
into a sum of money.
1 This custom was long after continued, though in a modified form, whon
a roast lamb was blessed at tho altar, and then cut up for distribution to
the clergy. At tho time of writing, however, oven this modified rite had
been discontinued, and instead of tho blessing and dividing up and distribution
of the lamb, the celebrant, before post-commuuiou, blessed small lamb-
patties which were distributed among tho clergy at the end of mass.
5 Jiubro ct claro. This may mean simply *red and white wine.’ But
clarum most probably stands for clarctum, and claret, as we shall see later on
(p. 267), originally meant a spiced drink.
CEREMONIAL DANCES 265
distribution of apples was one of the chief features of
this ceremonial collation ; moreover, in addition to the
wine, there was a special beverage, probably as a
loving-cup, called clarum in the 1582 ritual of St.
Mary’s, but bcrgercite in an ordinary of 1662 of the
same church, for there we read:
On completing the three turns [in the cloister], all the clergy,
together with the singers, go to the chapel of St. Martin, and
there take supper, at which they drink berocrctte three times,
and wine twice, namely, first of all and last of all. And before
drinking, one of the choir boys bears a silver cup filled with wine
to the oldest canon, either in length of service or senior in
rank, saying in a loud voice: *Dcncdicitc'; and the chaplains
(familliares) respond in the same loud voice [in French] : ‘ God
preserve the city.' And then the said senior canon says [in
Latin] : ‘May the King of angels bless the cup of His servants ’;
and the said chaplains answer: ‘Amen !’
The number of times of drinking the cup clearly
signifies a ceremonial and, most probably, symbolical
observance.
T h e E aster B anquet at R ome.
'Whether the writer of the Besanfon Letter is
correct in his surmise that**he origin of these cere­
monial meals must be traced solely to the Church of
Rome, is quite an open question, for they may have
been quite ‘catholic ’ in the early church. But how­
ever that may be, most interesting and detailed
evidence of the Paschal ceremonial common supper is
to be found in the old Roman ordinaries, and most
clearly in the 12th century Ordo Roraanus XII.1 The
1 See Mabillon (J.)—Germain (M.), Mutcum Italicuni (Paris, 1687),
pp. 186, 187; Migne, P. L. tom. 78, coll. 1079, 80. J. Kosters, Studien zu
Aiabillons romischen Ordines (MUnstor i. Westf., 1905), says that tho text is
printed in Migne *unaltered,’ but this is not correct, as may be seen by
referring to Faore (P.)—Duchesne (L.), Le Liber Ccnsuum de VEglite romaine
(Paris, 1910), pp. 298ff., whore the text is reproduced from the still extant
original MS. preserved in the Vatican.
2CG THE QUEST
author, or rather redactor, of this Ordinary was
Cardinal Cenci (Cencius de Sabellis), who was Papal
Treasurer under Celestin III. (Pope 1191-1198), and
wrote his MS. in 1192. In it, under § xv., ‘What the
Lord Pope has to do on Easterday,’ we read as
follows:
O rdo Roma n u s XII.
When mass, however, is over [the Pontiff] is crowned, and
returns with the procession to the palace. . . . And after
receiving homage from the cardinal of St. Laurence’s, he is
conducted, by the first and second notaries, wearing his mitre, into
the great Basilica Leoniana,1which is called Casa Majoi\ Thero
eleven seats are set ready, round the Pontiff’s table, for five
[cardinal] priests, five deacons, and the archdeacon, and there
also the couch of the Pontiff himself, according to custom, in tho
figure of the eleven apostles reclining round tllfe table of Christ.
Tho Pontiff crosses tho church and enters the treasury. Thence,
after the donative has been received by the treasurer in a silver
cup and distributed as on the day of the Lord's Nativity, he rises
and is conducted by tho head seneschal and the butler to tho
place which is called [tho Place] of tho Couches.1 And thero a
roast lamb is blessed by the junior cardinal priest; and thereafter
[tho Pontiff] returns to the couch made ready for him at tho
table. Thereon tho Pontiff, taking a morsel of the lamb, offers it
1 Built by Leo III. (Pope 795-bi-i).
1 ‘ Cubitorum,' lit. 1elbows.’ Fabrc-Duchcsne, p. 315 n., say that this
place seems to have beon tho 1hall' of tho eloveu couches (accubita), which
was built, like the basilica itself, by Leo III. (L. P. t. 2, pp. 11 and 40 n. 52).
It was, they conjecture, an additional banqueting hall, for the Pope could
not have entertained eithor in tho basilica or in the dining-room (triclinium)
of Leo III. all tho dignitaries and corporations which were by custom his
guests on tho days of high festival (coronationo). They, therefore, supposo
that after a brief appearance in tliis ‘Hall of tho Couches,' ho returned to the
triclinium proper, at which only personages of the highest quality had a seat.
Now though Maigne d’Arnis (Lex. *.r.), following Dufrcsne, does say that
accubitus or accubita were anciently called triclinia, and that they were
adjuncts of the larger sacred edifices in which the Pontiffs, after the sacred
rites were over, used to banquet the most distinguished of the clergy and
laity, tho text beforo us most clearly states that tho ‘tablo ’ was in the church
itself. There is, therefore, no question of a ‘dining-room.’ There was a
certain spot in tho church known as tho *Place of tho Couches' where the
‘tablo ' was set. Most probably, as we shall see later on in another instance
(p. 271 below), the ‘table ’ was in tho shape of the ancient triclinium, that is
it consisted of three tables, two parallel ones joined by a third.
CEREMONIAL DANCES 267
to the chief treasurer sitting on a bench facing his own conch,
saying: ‘What thou doest, do quickly; as he [sc. Judas] took it
for damnation, do thou take it for remission.’ The rest of the
lamb he distributes to those [t.c., the eleven] sitting at table, and
to the others standing round. In the middle of tho banquet one
of the cardinal deacons rises, at the bidding of the archdeacon,
and reads at table. And when tho banquet is over, the singers
chant a sequence suitable to Easter, at tho bidding of tho Pontiff.
Thereafter he goes down to the Lateran church to vespers, as is
set forth in the antiphonary. After the three vespers have been
celebrated—in the basilica of tbo Saviour, and at the font and at
the holy cross,—ho returns to the portico of St. Venantius.
There ho takes his seat, together with the cardinal bishops and
the rest of the orders [of the cardinalate] and others both of the
clergy and laity sitting on the ground on a carpet. Thereafter
claret and wine1are served to him and to all those standing round
by the major-domo and butlers.
Meanwhile the choir-master rises together with tho singers
and chants the following sequence in Greek1: ‘To us this day a
sacred passover has been displayed, a new passover, a holy
passover, a mystic passover—most august passover of Christ the
Redeemor, blameless passover, great passover, passover of the
faithful, a passover that openth to us the gates of paradise, a
passover that makes all mortals new. Christ guard the new
Pope 1’* And when this has been chanted they all return to their
various occupations. m
In order the better to cneck the details of this
extraordinarily interesting Easter ceremony at Romo,
we will quote the parallel passages of Ordo XI./ which
1 Tho later printed texts have clarctum vinum, but tho original MS.
reads quito clearly clarctum et vinum, and this is confirmed by comparison
with Ordo XI. Now ‘ claret’ was originally ‘a sweet or spiced wine,
hippocras ’ (Maigned'Arnis—Dufresne). Hero then we have again the
characteristic drink of two kinds as at Besanfon.
a The Greok of tho MS. is decidedly barbarous in parts; but tho fact
that the sequence was still sung in Greek at Romo is a most interesting relic
of high antiquity.
8 Papa (Ildjras), originally an onomatopceetic word for ‘father.’ For the
gods and saviour-gods who bore this title in antiquity see Hofer’s art. ‘Papas '
in Roscher’s Lex. Tho high priest of the god, e.g. of Attis, generally boro
the same title.
‘ For text seo Mabillou, op. cit. p. 141 Miguo, ibid. coll. 1044, 45 (also
printed apart in tom. 179, coll. 751, 62).
2G8 THE QUEST
was redacted, some fifty years previously (namely in
1143), by Benedict, canon of St. Peter’s, in the pontifi­
cate of Celestin II. In it the Easter Banquet is
described as follows (§§ 48, 49):
Ordo Romanus XI.
After mass . . . the notaries . . . conduct the Pontiff
on that day to the great Basilica of Leo, to the treasury. There
[sc. in the church] are sot ready eleven seats and one chair, round
the table of the Lord Pontiff, and his own couch is also fitly made
ready—in the figure of the twelve apostles round the table of
Christ when they ate the passover. There there recline on their
elbows at supper, five cardinals [sc. cardinal priests] and five
deacons and the archdeacon, after the donative has previously
been distributed in the treasury, together with the *hands,’1as on
the day of tho Lord’s Nativity. Thence ho rises and comes to the
place called [tho Place] of the Couches, whore a roast lamb is
blossed. He blesses it and returns to the couch made ready for
him at tho table. Tho chief treasurer is seated on the chair in
front of the couch. Then the Lord Pontiff cuts off a portion of
the lamb, and first offers it to the chief treasurer, saying: 1What
thou doest, do quickly ; as he took it for damnation, do thou take
it for remission,’ and ho puts it into his mouth, while the latter
takes and eats it. The rest of tho lamb ho gives to the eleven
sitting at table and to any otlyys ho pleases, and thus all eat it
up. Half way through the oanquet, on the direction of the
archdeacon, one of the deacons rises and reads the lection. Then,
on tho bidding of the Lord Pontiff, the singers chant a sequence
suitable to Easter, to the accompaniment of the organ.* When
the sequence is finished, they go and kiss tho feet of the Pontiff,
1 Cp. § 22: “ On that day of the Lord’s Nativity tho Lord Pope gives to
all the senior ranks a ‘hand 1(manus), that is a double donative—namely to
tho prefect 20 pounds and a ‘hand,’ to the chief of tho notaries 4 pounds and
a 1hand,’” etc.
5 Modulatis organis. Tho writer of the Besanfon Letter, who quotes part
of the above, comments that this phraso probably refers to tho simple contra­
puntal accompanimont of those days, which consisted of little else than
chords in thirds and fifths. In this he follows tho explanation given to the
term organa in Lebeuf’s Traiti (Paris, 1741). Lebeuf was apparently tho
first to explain the correct meaning of the term when used in cliautiug
(p. 1033 n.).
CEREMONIAL DANCES 269
who gives them a cup filled with a potion. This they drink and
receive from the treasurer a gold piece.1
When the banquet is over, the Pontiff goes down to the
basilica of the Saviour, to the sacristy, where he rests for a space.
Thence rising, after nones have been said, he enters [the Lateran
Church] for vespers, in the order set forth in the antiphouary.
When the three vespers are finished—in the basilica of the
Saviour, and at the font and at the holy cross—the Lord Pontiff
returns to the portico which has been made ready for him. He
seats himself on the faldstool which has been set there, with the
other orders round him. Then the majordomo, with the other
servitors, in due order, prepares the potion before the Lord Pontiff;
and [while this is being done] ho drinks wine himself and all the
others drink it. Meanwhile the singers rise and chant this
sequence in Greek: ‘To us this day a sacred passover.’* When
tho sequence is finished, they go and kiss the feet of the Pontiff
and he gives them the cup of the potion to drink. So all depart
in joy.
The cup was evidently something more than a
relic of the passover-cup, for that consisted simply of
wine; it was apparently a loving-cup. How then had
it become a potio (ypocrcisium, bergeretta, claruvi,
claretum) ? It at once recurs to the mind that in the
more primitive forms of the mysteries intoxicating
draughts were frequent; ivh the higher forms also
potions and philtres were used. May there, however,
be here a contrast or transference of symbolism, as in
tho eating of the lamb, a contrast between the draught
given to the crucified and the loving-cup given to the
faithful ? Is it possible even that we have here an
early conflation of the Jewish passover-cup with the
soporific potion given to crucified criminals in Roman
times and to those condemned to stoning in Rabbinical
days, to ease the pain of their sufferings, of which we
1 Tho two last sentences seem to bo a ‘doublet, judging by what follows.
3 The first words only are given in Latin transliteration, namely,1Pascha
ieron imin timeron.'
270 THE QUEST
have a reversal or complement; in the ‘prophetical ’ cup
of gall and vinegar of the evangelists? This speculation
may be very much of a drawing of a bow at a venture;
still the contrast of damnatio and remissio, in eating
the lamb, is suggestive.
In any case the Easter Banquet at Rome in the
12th century is significant enough in other respects,
and doubtless goes back to a very high antiquity,
though of course in a less elaborate form. There is no
space, unfortunately, in the present paper to cany
these researches back to the early middle ages in
detail, or to the still earlier centuries. But before
leaving the subject we may record an interesting
example of the practico of the 10th century in
Germany. St. Ulric was bishop of Augsburg 966-977,
and this is how he kept Eastertide1:
T h e E aster Fea st of St . Ul r ic .
After the solemnities of the masses had been performed in
the customary manner at oventido, and when the Body of Christ
had been distributed, and the sacred vestments laid aside—on
that day, the table being laid for rofoction, [St. Ulric] took his
seat together with a largo nunjjxor [of his monks] ; and when all
had been copiously refreshed, he let them return with joy to their
cells.
When then the greatly-longod-for and holy Paschal day is
come, after prime ho went into tho church of St. Ambrose3(where
on Good Friday he laid the Body of Christ, with a stone placed
over it), and there with a few clergy ho celebrated tho mass of the
Holy Trinity. When this mass had been celebrated, he headed
the procession of tho clergy, w
rho had meanwhile assembled, in the
portico adjoining the same church, wearing their vestments of
1 Seo Vita Udalricii Augustani Episcopi (by Gerard the priest), c. 4;
Mabillon, Acta Sanctorum Ordinis S. Baud. Saic. X., p. 11); Migno, tom.
185, coll. 1020, 21. Tho text is somewhat barbarous.
3 It used to stand near tho catliodral but has long disappeared from
memory.
CEREMONIAL DANCES 271
highest ceremony. And himself carrying the Body of Christ and
the Gospel, and with tapers and incense, accompanied with an
appropriate salutation of verses sung by the boys, he proceeded
through the court to the church of St. John the Baptist, where he
sang terce. Thence, with antiphons composed most fitly in honour
of this day, ho finally came to the cathedral1to celebrate mass, in
most handsome procession, the clergy walking two and two accord­
ing to rank. And so after mass had been most devoutly and
religiously sung, while all are receiving the sacraments of Christ
and returning to their homes, he went to meat (cibus). There he
found three tables laid with every adornment—one at which he
was wont to sit with his guests, another for the clergy of the
cathedral and a third for the congregation of St. Afra.2 Accord­
ingly, when the food had been sanctified, he distributed to all
pieces of lamb and morsels of bacon,3 which had been blessed
during the solemnities of the masses, and then only did he himself
partake of food with them with all joy. Moreover, at the
appointed time the musicians and singers arrived (there were so
many of them that they almost filled the space between the nave
and choir* standing in ranks), and performed three measures in
concert. And thus, with joy increased by the music, the canons,
meanwhile at the bidding of the bishop asking for and receiving
the loving-cup,3chanted the first respond about the resurrection
of the Lord. And when this loving-cup had been drunk, the
congregation of St. Afra at the second table”did likewise. But
when evening drew on, he bade ti^Sm give cups to himself and
those sitting with him [at the chief table], and asked all to drink
the third loving-cup in charity; and when that cup had been
drunk, all the clergy together, with joy, chanted the third respond.
1 Lit. 1to the dome ’—ad tuomum (Old Ger. Thuom, the current Dom).
5 The regular clergy of those days occupied the church of St. Afra, now
the church of St. Ulric.
3 At Auxcrro also boar’s flesh entered into the menu (p. 200 above).
4 Intercapcclinem aula. If this is the correct translation, it confirms
the conjecture in the last paper (p. 98 n. 4) that tho orchestra was between
the choir and nave. It follows that the banquet was held in the church.
3 Tho writer of the Besanfon Letter, who quotes this paragraph, trans­
lates charitas as a ‘gift ’ (donne) simply; but G. Grandauer, Das Lebcn
Oudalrichs (Berlin, 1891), p. 83 n. 1, says it was a measure of wine, as a love
gift.
3 The third really. Tho three tables were most probably arranged in tho
form of a triclinium as at Romo.
6
272 THE QUEST
And when this had been sung, the canons rose for the singing of
the hymn, that thus with fit preparation they might go to vespers.
And when vespers were over, the bishop with his guests and
guards used to return to his own house amid general rejoicing.
T h e P robable Origin of the B anquets.
Here the term charitas, which the context compels
us to translate as loving-cup, at once reminds us of its
Greek equivalent agape, and we have at last found a
direct link with early antiquity and custom. The
mediaeval Easter Banquets were evidently in part
ceremonial and elaborate relics of the primitive Love-
feasts. It would be far too lengthy an undertaking to
attempt here even an outline of the history of the
famous Agapae in the early church, concerning which
there is great difference of opinion. But before closing
the present sketoh of these interesting remnants and
vestiges of ancient custom iu the mediaeval churchos,
it may be of service to point out that as some of the
things eaten at those repasts and banquets were of
peculiar shapes, they were probably of a symbolical
nature originally. Some other element, therefore,
must be sought for in these syncretic customs, besides
those of the Jewish passover and the original simple
love-feast. This other element, as we might expect,
is in highest probability to be traced to wide-spread
sacrificial folk- and mystery-customs. Nothing was
more common in antiquity than the eating of symboli­
cal food and drinking of symbolical drink on feast
days. For the victims or their special organs were
gradually substituted pastry models or cakes of many
kinds (see Lobeck, Aglaoph., 1060-85). Also among the
symbols of the Orphic and Isiac mysteries, for in­
stance, we find mention of a number of sorts of cakes,
CEREMONIAL DANCES 273
including sesame cakes, pyramid cakes, globular and
round cakes covored with *knobs ’ of some kind, and
also mulberries and apples.1 It may, therefore, not be
owing purely to coincidence that we can at once
parallel the sesame cakes with our spiced bread, and,
more strikingly still, the characteristic shapes of the
mystery-cakes with those with which we ai’e already
familiar—namely the round hosts or wafers and the
three-cornered pastries, for if globular and round go
together so equally do pyramidal and three-cornered,
the pyramid being on a triangular base.®
But most interesting of all, perhaps, was the chief
of the Bacchic cakes, representing a heart, for according
to the mystery-legend, when the young god (Iacchos)
was torn to pieces and eaten by the Titans, his heart
alono was saved by his divine sister, and from this
centre of immortality the god came again to life and
birth. The thin crust of the *cakes ’ representing this
sacrum was made of cheese, honey and flour, and these
‘dumplings ’ wore stuffed—probably with minced meat.8
Now as a round pine-cone also symbolised the heart of
Bacchus, I have wondered whether the apples4may not
also have borne the same significance; and if so,
whether they were of any special colour—say dark red.
In that case, if we also knew what the ‘carpendu ’
apples of Toul and Besangon were, we might have
another very striking parallel. In any case, we have
the direct parallel of the apples.
1 Clorn. Alox. Prolrcpt. ii. 22 (P. p. 11); Aruobius, 1. 5, c. 19.
a It is, however, to bo noted that the ancients themselves wero in dispute
over the derivation of this cake-name, some thinking that it means simply
‘wheat-cake ’ (Ik irvpSv). It was certainly made of wheat and honey, but
probably Athenagoras (xiv. 647b) is right when he says we must distinguish
between the ‘ pyramfs ’ and the ‘pyramous.’
3 See M. Hofler's communication on ‘<
*>6oU
,' in Wiinsch’s Archin fu r
Religionswisscnscliaft (Aug. 1912), xv. 4. 638-641.
* Generally connected with the apples of the Hcsperides.
27-i THE QUEST
Finally we have mention of a certain spiced bread
and drink in the mysteries of Bacchus.1
All these symbolic objects were concealed in the
mystic boxes, chests or caskets. And not only were
there cakes, and even ‘iced ’ or sugared cakes, but also
sweet-meats (bcllaria=Tpayi'ifxaTa) in peculiar shapes,
with which we may parallel the sweet-meats (bella-
riola) of the Auxerre grolee. Such pastries or sweet­
meats, for instance, in the shape of a lyre, ofa bow or of
arrows (the distinctive symbols of the god), were used in
the Apollinian mysteries and offered in little boxes;
these were all called ‘oblation1
2 sweets or cakes, and
this tempts us to compare them with the 4oblates ’ of
Auxerre, Besan£on, and elsewhere, and even finally,
perhaps, in some indirect manner, with the donative
‘hands’ at Rome, for Dufresno refers to a certain
4manus Christi ’ that was made of sugar. All this
cannot, I think, be due entirely to coincidence; it is,
on the contrary, sufficiently striking to deserve further
investigation.
G. R. S. Mead.
•I
1 Cp. Lidd. and Scott s.v. rpippa, and Hesycliins s.v. ivrpnov.
1 Ferta (cp. Lobeck, Aglaoph., p. 705).
NOTE
Th e D iv in e D ance according to P lo t in u s.
T h o se of our readers who have been interested in the paper on
‘The Sacred Dance of Jesus,’ may perhaps like to glance through
the following version of a striking passage of Plotinus’ famous
treatise ‘On the Good or the One ’ {En. VI. ix. 8):
“ If, then, a soul is conscious of itself in that other mode of
time, it also knows that its truo motion i6 not in a straight line,—
save when it breaks from it; hut that its natural motion is in a
circle, as it were, not round some thing external to itself, but
round a centre in itself. Now the centre is the that from which
the circle is. The soul, then, will be moved round that from
which it is; on this it will depend, contending unto it, as all souls
should. The souls of gods tend ever towards their centre, and
through their tending thitherwards are gods ; for that which is in
union with its centre is a god, whereas that which is far removed
from it is man— [not the true man but man] the manifold and
brute. This, then, which is, as though it were, the centre of the
soul is what we seek; though we should understand there is some
other That in which, as though it were, nil centres meet. And we
must not forget, moreover, that the centre of this circle of the
soul is an analogy. For the soul is not a circle in the same way
as is the figure [in geometry], but in that the primordial nature of
the soul is ‘in-itself’ and ‘round-ittalf,’ and in that souls depend
on something like a centre, and all the more when they are
separate from body in a state of wholeness. But now, whereas a
part of us is under the dominion of the body—as though a man
should have his feet in water, but in the remainder of his body is
above it—it surely is by that which is beyond the part submerged
in body that we are, at the centre of ourselves, united with the
That which is, as though it were, the Centre of all centres,—just
as we make the centres of all the largest circles of a sphere
coincident with the one centre of the sphero containing them.
“ Now if souls were corporeal circles and not psychic ones,
they all would meet in space in the one centre of the sphere, and
198
Oct. 19X0.
199 NOTES
wheresoever that centre was, they would be round it. But since
the souls are in themselves intelligible things and that One Centre
is beyond intelligence, we must conceive the union of the soul with
the Supreme is brought about by other powers than that by means
of which the power of the intelligence is made to bo one with its
object,—yea by a more intimate conjunction than even the imme­
diate presonce, in likeness and in sameness, of intelligence with its
object, and the union with a cognate nature with nothing keeping
them apart. For bodies are prevented from communion with other
bodies, but incorporeal beings are not kept apart by bodies. Souls
are accordingly not kept apart from ono anothor by space, but by
otherness and difference. When, therefore, otherness is not
present, the things that are not other are present with each other.
That Centre, then, which has no otherness is ever present; and
we are present with It when we are free from otherness.
“ It does not yearn for us, so as to move round us, but we
yearn after It, so as to move round It, and ever round It, although
wo do not always keep our eyes on It. But as a choros out
of tune, keeps dancing round tho choros-leador, when turned
to face tho play or audience, but when it turns again to him,
sings well and dances truly round him ; so we for ever keep
a-dance round Him, and should it bo that this should cease
entirely for us, wo should no longer bo. Wo do not always keep
our eyes on Him ; but when wo do, then do we win to Perfectness
and Peace, and aro no longer out of tune, but truly dance round
Him the Dance Divine.”
*!k
C
